Roaming Home
Jeremy Dawson

Copyright © 2012 Jeremy Dawson

All rights reserved.

This is an authorised free edition from www.obooko.com
Although you do not have to pay for this book, the author’s intellectual property rights
remain fully protected by international Copyright laws. You are licensed to use this
digital copy strictly for your personal enjoyment only. This edition must not be copied,
translated, rewritten, hosted or distributed on other websites or offered for sale in any
form. If you paid for this free edition, or to gain access to it, we suggest you demand a
refund and report the transaction to the author and Obooko.

ISBN: 978-0-473-67385-7

Fivetogether.nz

DEDICATION
Dedicated to my wife Serena and our children for their love and faith and constantly filling my life and truck
with beautiful things and the one who created us all.

CONTENTS

Acknowledgments
In the beginning p7
Change of plans p21
Goodbye P27
Land Ho p47
The return Home p61
Second Farewell p67
Pandemic? P73
The last return p97
Their Story p108

Roaming home

Elizabeth cantering her horse along Westport Beach

5

ACKNOWLEIDGMENTS
I would like to acknowledge the following fellow travelers, who contributed to this
work.
Kate Dunn
Phillip and Cindy James
Fran Intuitive
She Laird
Sharon and Fred Sinclair
Anita Thompson
Leonie Bruker
Garry & Pam McQuoid
Philippa Page
Annie and Richard Bland

6

Roaming home

IN THE BEGINNING
I don't want to live in a truck. That's what I think. Who would? It makes no sense and it
wasn’t part of the plan. I just spent 10 years of my life, and all the money we had,
building a house. Why on earth would we want to leave it all behind, move into an old
Ford trader truck with only 10 square meters of floor space for five people, all their
possessions, and a dog? Was it some kind of insanity? poverty? Stupidity? Perhaps all
the above.
For many people who have chosen to live like this, there are a multitude of reasons as
diverse as the people doing it. There are the romantics, the lifestyle-conscious, the
hippies, and almost anything in between. When I was younger and had considered
traveling, I had been reading a book on Romany gypsies and the simplicity of the life
they lived. It made me think it would be a good idea to build something like their
caravan vardos onto a trailer and travel the country leaving all my cares behind. But I
was on a mission. A mission to improve myself and be something, to get ahead and
leave as much of the past stuff-ups behind me, as I could.
I didn’t know whether chasing the dream of house ownership, wife, kids and the dog
were totally kiwi, or Americanized dreams I learnt from movies. Or a drive built into us
from early human beginnings, to secure a dwelling and someone warm to cuddle up to,
but my young mind accepted the mission and went off to fulfill it. I had already had
many false starts and setbacks, from living on the streets to foster care, and I felt time
was running out. I pushed my fanciful and frivolous notions of being anything other
than a typical kiwi bloke, to the back of my mind, including the idea of a gypsy life.
At least, I thought I did. But alas it seemed already too late. Too many obstacles,
detours and calamitous situations would seem to trip me up at every turn. Some at no
fault of my own and some very much my fault. In the end I had all but given up on the
programming I was failing to follow anyway, and then when it seemed all hope was
gone, I succeeded at last…
I was living out of my car in Auckland and a friend suggested I visit a family he knew in
7

Roaming home

Whangarei that could use a hand on their farm, and since I had a background in
farming and little else to do, I thought, why not? I left Auckland heading for whangarei
with not much to hope for except a new place to be, and perhaps a fresh start. After 6
months of farm life, I started to take a shine to their daughter Serena. She wasn’t your
typical nail polish and lipstick type of girl and although a Northland princess to me, she
would think nothing of grabbing a rat by the tail that happened to be walking on the
rafters above my head, and whacking it against a post then throwing it in the paddock
with tail residue stuck to her fingers. She thought, ‘this will impress him.’
I felt a bit sick actually, but I hadn’t had much luck with relationships in general so I
wasn’t going to complain. She seemed to think I might make a good husband and after
a while we decided to get married. We then moved into a small shared 2-bedroom
cottage with Serena’s parent’s and it wasn’t long before we realized it was just too
crowded for a newlywed couple. We decided then that we would start living in our
small 21-foot trailer sailor that we had recently brought and restored, and was now
moored in the Ngunguru river just down the road. It was quite peaceful listening to the
river sounds and you could almost say adventurous as we also learned to sail on the
river. But it was quite cold in winter and picking the right time of tide to get on or off
did get a little tiresome.
We investigated the prospect of buying a bus to convert into a camper and live in, but
we knew little about how to convert one and the cost to buy one wouldn’t have left us
enough money to kit it out. We also needed something a little more ready to move into,
so we started renting to buy a large caravan and parked it on the farm we were working
at. We got it cheap because it needed some work doing on it and I was reasonably good
at welding. We towed it home and I went to work straight away welding the draw-bar
up, while it was propped up by the barn on a piece of wood. I had almost finished when
it slipped off the piece of wood and some part of it caught my thumb and took the nail
off. Ouch, but I had one more bit to do so I kept working on it till I was done and then
I found Serena and she took me to the doctors to get it sewn back on.
I think the pain relief hurt more than the nail coming out and he injected so much of
the stuff in one hole he made it came out another one. That’s when Serena fainted.
Luckily the Dr caught her just before she hit the floor. On the way home I had to be
careful not to whack my thumb every time we went around a corner and I stopped once
8

Roaming home

on our road to hold Serena’s hair back while she threw up. Where was my warrior
princess now?
We had been looking at seeing if we could find some land close by Serena’s family but
everything was out of reach for our budget so Serena’s parents offered to let us have
some land on their dry stock farm along the road and would call it an early inheritance.
So, we moved our caravan on top of a hill in a paddock on Kaitaia road. It was great,
and had stunning views of the local countryside and for a while we were happy there
and it suited us for work as we were still share-milking on Serena’s grandparent’s farm
down the road. It didn’t exactly tick any boxes I had in mind for a married life as I still
didn’t have a house to go with the wife. But we were together and that is all that
mattered, as seems to be the case for newlyweds.
We even said we could be happy in a cardboard box, as long as we had each other. We
made a shower and toilet from plywood sheets and dug a long drop hole, which was
more of a short drop really, and although it was a bit rough, we thought it would do the
job. Although, some attention to detail might have prevented me stabbing myself with a
screw that was a bit long when bending down to get the soap, and when it came time to
move the long toilet, which filled up faster than I thought it would, I accidentally
stepped in the hole providing Serena with much entertainment as I set about hosing off.
One thing that wasn’t quite so easy to live with was the wind. One night when it blew
particularly hard, the awning tore off the caravan, taking the aluminum strip with it and
we spent hours holding down the skylight which seemed quite happy to follow the
awning like some little plastic bird, determined to leave the nest as the caravan shook
and rattled. The cardboard box would have had no chance. We moved back to the farm
and settled in a paddock there. One day Serena’s parents announced that they had
found a little building that we could move onto the hill in place of the caravan.
Something less prone to flight.
We discussed it with Serena's family, who assured us we would have a title if we did
decide to invest in something more permanent and Serena’s uncle even offered to lend
us some money to get started. However, like many who have built on a family property,
well it sometimes comes with inherent problems and unless you have a pretty good
relationship and understanding about the expectations, I would advise against it or at
9

Roaming home

least have things in writing because situations change, just as people do.
What started as a dream became a nightmare. What we basically ended up with was an
old shell that used to be a lecture room from the hospital, transported to the site, and
dropped onto some blocks of wood while we worked at getting the foundations done.
We had to use a step ladder to get up into it and it had no door, so we stored stuff
underneath it to keep it out of the weather as we wanted to keep the interior clear so we
could build the internal walls and layout for the bedroom, living area, kitchen,
bathroom, and toilet. We had sold our caravan and stayed with another uncle and aunt
of Serena’s who lived next door.

One day when we went to do some work on the house, we found the generator, our
only source of power had been stollen. Sometimes when things like that happen it feels
personal. Like the time someone took to all the letter boxes on our road with a baseball
bat. If they had just been knocked off their perches it would have felt less malicious.
But these letter boxes were not just flat, I mean they were completely flat. I have no
idea how no one heard the racket they must have made. I was already feeling unwell at
this stage and it felt like everything was against me and trying to build this house was
becoming seemingly impossible. One day as I sat in the shell of the building, I began to
realize something. I’m not sure why, but it just felt wrong. As though I was building a
trap rather than a home. I cried as I sat there knowing that this wasn’t what I wanted at
all, and I would be committed to finishing what I started despite how I felt about it.
I was mostly doing it for Serena’s family who wanted us to stay in the area. But also, to
satisfy the conditioning, the inner drive to tick those boxes that I had been straining to
grow into my whole life. But what comes after that? I had no personal dreams to
follow, no personal ambitions, except to constantly conform and do what I thought I
was supposed to do. It all seemed so purposeless. But in the end, I determined to finish
what I started despite how I felt about it because that’s what big boys do. Don’t they?
But before we got the chance to do much more to it, besides the internal framing, I had
started going downhill physically and had to go to Auckland and have a heart valve
transplant. It was a stressful time. The wicked hand of coincidence, never seemed to let
up and I was always navigating one calamity or another in life. So here I was, back in
10

Roaming home

Auckland hospital were my poor wife and mother-in-law, got to witness a drugged and
miserable patient swearing at the male nurse who kept taking away the sick bowel in
ICU when I wasn’t finished filling it and in my state of mind, I really felt like the guy
was doing it to be mean. You really have no filter, or at least I didn’t with so many pain
killing chemicals floating around in my brain. “What a bleep-bleep” I said. “I’m not
finished.” Serena shushed me and said I was being loud and said that he could hear me
"But that bleep-bleep, keeps taking the bowl away and I’m not finished,” I cried. She
apologized for me more than once as each time I threw up he would quickly take my
bowl away again and I seriously doubted he would make it back in time with another
one. I couldn't believe it. There was plenty of room left in that bowl.

As if that wasn't enough, Serena also had to continue learning to drive in Auckland city
traffic, which was a big deal for her as she had hardly left the family home, except for a
farm trip with her grandad when they went to the South Island to look at cattle. She
didn’t really know how to drive before I arrived on the scene either and so I had
donated my car for the purpose. By the time Serena had gained some confidence, it
had been panel repaired once or twice and, and on one occasion, pulled out of a ditch
when she pulled over too far to let a truck pass on a narrow stretch of our road. We
ended up down the side of a bank with only a punga tree stopping us going over and
into a gully. As we sat there, she turned to me and said “shall I put the hand brake on?”
I was still in a bit of shock, but I said "might as well,” in as a calm a voice as possible,
trying not to let on how freaked out I was. The truck she had tried to make way for
stopped and with the aid of one of his strops the driver pulled us back onto the road.
After the heart operation I couldn’t do much of anything but sleep and cry. I felt
different somehow as a person. I would be sitting up in bed holding a pillow to my
chest because of the pain when I coughed and I would be talking to Serena about the
house building or our upcoming anniversary and then I would just start crying again for
no reason. Apparently, a common occurrence but I didn’t know at the time, although it
did say something about it in the pre-op paperwork, but I never read that stuff. It’s like
the agreements and conditions you have to say you have read and understand when you
sign up to things. Who reads those? I tried to walk but I had no energy and could only
manage 5 minutes before needing to rest again. It reminded me of my life before I had
11

Roaming home

the first heart operation at age eight and Rheumatic fever at 14 when I had to spend 6
months in hospital. But gradually things improved over time and I had more energy,
but the change in my character seemed to be permanent. Where did my sense of humor
go?
Later I found out that sometimes, after so long a procedure under general anesthetic
some brain injury can result from the operation. Perhaps that was it, but I found I was
more prone to bouts of depression afterwards. After a month or so we decided that we
should go to the South Island for our wedding anniversary and have a break before
getting into the house build again. We traded the station wagon with Serena's parents
for their van and I built a bed into it and somewhere to cook as well as store what we
would need for the trip.
Then off we went on our first road trip adventure. We had given ourselves 2 weeks for
the trip, but if I had known then how big the South Island was and how long we would
be driving just to get around it, I would have taken much longer. As it was, I kept
feeling the constant need to be driving. Perhaps due to the operation or the short time
we had for the trip I just couldn’t seem to rest. It was like I was trying to get away from
something and sometimes I would drive for 13 hours straight and many of Serena’s
photos ended up being of blurry images from the windows of the van as we sped by.

12

Roaming home

Finally finding some snow
We were quite looking forward to seeing some snow though, and we excitedly chased
about for it as though we were on the hunt and snow was our prey. Often it would
arrive tauntingly at the place we just left and we would sometimes backtrack to where it
was falling only to find it went somewhere else. Sometimes during quiet moments, I
would look at my beautiful wife and think ‘how did I end up with this person and
Serena felt like a stranger to me sometimes. Perhaps because of the operation but I
would wonder why me and this beautiful young lady were together. Were we a good
match? She was 15 years younger than me and yet seemed more mature and perhaps I
had some wisdom that helped navigate some of life’s hurdles and this was our glue.
Two people with flaws and vulnerabilities propping each other up as we did life
together. Many of these thoughts are part of the experience I guess and the more I
thought about it the more I didn’t understand it. What was obvious from the start when
13

Roaming home

we first met and worked together on her families share milking operation, was that we
both knew how to work and we seemed to be so comfortable around each other. I put
it down to Serena's exceptional qualities, rather than my own and I sometimes
wondered if she would stay now that I wasn’t the same as when we first met.
Once we returned home however on familiar ground, we wasted no time in getting
back to work on the house. We had pretty much used all our savings up and were now
relying on help from Serena's parents and extended family to continue paying for
materials and the cost of drainage. It had been two years since we began and now with a
baby on the way. We were also part time building Serena's parents a barn house,
because they had moved onto their own block of land as well and had been living in a
garage. We were probably over halfway through our build when it all came to an abrupt
halt and the money ran out. We were stuck in a house we couldn’t afford to finish and
no money to do anything else. Then Elizabeth was born.

Young Elizabeth

We been finding that the space inside the house was too small even before Elizabeth
was born so I was constantly remodeling things to try and make some more room. We
decided in the end we just couldn’t fit everything in. So, I borrowed the sawmill from
14

Roaming home

Serena’s dad and milled a few trees on the farm to make an extension on the back of
the house.

We didn’t have the money to do the next part so for a year we just had the foundations
and framing and I was despairing about the fact that all my timber was going to be
ruined before we ever built it. Then we started to learn about soil cement wall
construction methods and thought, perhaps we could do that as a cheap option. A
friend who was renting a house not far away, which had been made of rammed earth
asked his landlord if he wanted the ton or so of cement that was still sitting in the
garage, but getting to the point it was starting to go hard. His landlord said he didn’t
want it anymore, so he donated it to us and we began building our walls out of soil and
cement mixed in a mixer and poured into a mold.

Elizabeth would sit in her pram crying to be free while we worked. It took 2 years to
complete the walls as we could only do a little at a time when we could afford more
15

Roaming home

cement and reinforcing steel. We borrowed the mill again later to cut timber from some
fallen down pine trees on the grandparent’s farm for the rafters and for beams but we
found out too late that the trees were full of borer. Eventually after coats of kerosene
and diesel, most of the borer was convinced to leave, and we gradually built the rest of
the extension.
Then we had our second child Stephanie before we called it finished, or as much as we
could. It was great having so much more space, but we still had bare walls, no window
surrounds, the roof leaked and needed replacing and it was cold even with the fire
going. Eventually the large borer beetles began to be less frequently flying about the
house and we endured for 7 years living in it, but basically it was a money pit with no
money to spare for it and sometimes because of the leaks, some of the lintels sprouted
mushrooms. They could have been any kind but probably not the edible ones. We still
had no title, and therefore no insurance, and because I was unable to work a lot of the
time with other heath complications, we saw little chance of a future for a growing
family and we were too far away from other people. I felt isolated and coming from
Auckland I found I didn’t like that as much as Serena did.
I am not saying that there were not good times and memories there too, but they were
overshadowed by the bigger issues. Then began the conversation that led to our first
considering living in a house truck. I was chatting to a guy named Philip James one
night on Facebook, who used to go to a church I attended back in Taranaki years ago.
He was living in a bus in a paddock and getting ready to leave his job and just take off
around New Zealand with his young family. It reignited the idea to travel New Zealand
myself and see a country I knew extraordinarily little of. I think if he hadn’t encouraged
us that day to give it a go, we probably wouldn’t have done so. But the doing was a bit
of a problem as we had no money to get started. About a month later I was talking to
another friend in Taranaki named Trever, who had helped me with the milling for our
house and told him what we were thinking about doing, and to my surprise he offered
to lend us the money to buy a truck. I think he was living in a bus on someone’s
property at the time.
Wow, I was excited! We started looking almost right away and after a few weeks found
an old truck on the internet that looked promising. A 1983 Ford Trader which was once
owned by the ministry of works in Rotorua. Since Serena’s family owned one of these
16

Roaming home

types of trucks in the past and I was familiar with them we decided to buy it. We also
had spare parts for it from a wrecked one sitting in a paddock on the farm in case we
needed to replace anything.
The next day we went and had a look and bought it. It was a little bigger than the one I
was used to driving but seemed to have the same feel. When we first picked it up it did
seem to smoke a little but I was told it’s just been sitting a while, so I thought nothing
of it. But even after driving some miles I noticed that the smoke wasn’t going away in
fact, I suspect it to be partly responsible for global warming.
I knew very little about diesel engines, but it just didn’t seem right. My heart dropped a
bit, and I was thinking about taking it back. But then I remembered the spare parts on
the old wreck in the paddock that had a good motor in it. Besides, I had nothing to
look forward to if I didn’t at least try to make it work. It was a chance to change things
and get out of the box I had spent so many years trying to get into.
The old wrecked truck on the farm had been sitting there for 2 years quietly rusting
away and returning to the ground from whence it came. But would the engine still be
any good, I wondered after sitting out in the weather for 2 years? Well, there was only
one way to find out.
Over the next weekend I managed to get the old truck chassis lifted off the ground with
the help of a tractor I borrowed from Serena's parents and towed it home. It was so
rusty I was a bit concerned the chassis might fall in half, as I towed it along the road. I
was having a few doubts as to whether this was going to work at all. What if the motor
was seized? I got it home and pushed it into the garage and wired up a battery to see if I
could get the motor to turn over. Nothing. It just sat there frozen solid, and I started to
think our traveling days were not going to be a reality after all.
I thought like this a lot during the build as we either ran out of money or something
else arose to thwart our plans. However, I did know a little about engines in general, so
I decided I would strip it down and see how bad it was. After an hour I got the head off
the motor and found that the piston rings were stuck solid to the side of the number
three cylinder by rust. It made me sick to look at it.
“Well Dr, what do you think?
17

Roaming home

‘’I think this duck is dead.”
“After a thorough investigation, I ascertained that perhaps the valve was depressed on
the inlet port and moisture had gotten in through the inlet valve.”
‘’Who cares, just fix it Dr. Rapata.” It seemed like it was just corrosion on the lip of the
piston line that was stopping the piston from going right to the top. Well, I didn’t know
how I was going to get it unstuck or whether it would break the rings if I did, but I had
nothing to lose by trying. So, I poured oil and diesel all around the piston hoping it
would help to soften the rust and then after wiping my brow with an oil-stained hand I
went inside for the night. It had been a long day, and everything seemed to be uncertain
again.
The next morning, I went and had a look at the cylinder to see how it looked now that
it had been soaking all night. The diesel and oil mix were still sitting in the cylinder so I
knew that the rings must have been intact still, maybe. Or it would have disappeared
into the engine, wouldn’t it? Well, nothing to do now but try and turn it to see if it was
enough to free it. I put a socket and wrench on the crankshaft and tried to get it to turn.
Nothing moved so I got a bit of pipe and stuck that onto the end of the wrench, still
nothing. I found another bit of pipe slightly longer and put that over the first bit of
pipe. Now I had a 2-meter-long length of leveraging power, and I pulled down on it
with every bit of weight I had. At first nothing happened. Then, with a mighty bang it
broke free of the rust and the piston moved. It was an awesome feeling to know I had
freed it but then I was worried that in the process, I might have broken the rings and it
would be useless. I wouldn’t know unless I started it. But first I needed to clean the
bore from all the pitting and rust marks. I wound the piston to the bottom and got a
honing tool and some oil and began the job of honing all the cylinders.
It took ages to bring them back up to a good finish and I couldn’t completely remove
some of the pitting at the very top of the cylinder, but it was so slight that I didn’t think
it would make too much difference. It had been a big risk putting so much pressure on
the crank shaft and bearings getting it un-seized, but I had nothing to lose if I broke it
and everything to gain if I didn’t. I poured more diesel and such down its gob to wash
away some of the fine particles of metal from honing.

18

Roaming home

The next job was to look at all the valves in the head to see what condition they were in,
and as I suspected one was corroded and the others were only average condition.
I could only afford to buy one new valve as well as new gasket and head bolts so all the
others I would have to clean up and reuse. I ordered a new valve, new head gasket and
head bolts and waited for them to arrive.
About a week later with everything back together and with the new valve installed it was
time to see whether the operation had been a success or if it would run like a half hairy
goat. I wired up a battery to the starter and turned it over. Everything went round and
round, but nothing happened. Then I remembered that I needed to have power to the
part that keeps the diesel valve open and the fuel flowing. So, I wired that up next and
retried it. Still nothing.
Next, I decided I probably needed to bleed all the injectors as well and after I did that,
something happened. It coughed with encouragement.
First a little smoke came out the exhaust and then it fired on a couple of cylinders. After
a bit more bleeding to get all the air out it finally started up with a big cloud of smoke,
which quickly filled up the garage and I ran for it. Global warming again, I felt guilty. I
let it warm up and burn off all the built-up carbon, water, diesel and anything else that
was in the system while I waited outside for it to either blow up or keep going.
Gradually it started to run clean.
I was ecstatic. It ran just fine, and I had a new-ish motor to replace the worn out one in
the truck I had bought. Then a thought struck me, is it even the same motor? I didn’t
even consider that. It was a ford trader so I just assumed it would be the same. I quickly
checked the engine on the other truck and the serial number and thankfully it was the
same gutless 3-liter engine. The next 3 weeks consisted of swapping parts over with the
new engine, and the gear box from the wreck which had the bonus of a high, low gear
box which would mean better economy on the flat and low-down power on the hills.
Once the motor and gearbox were in the new truck, I thought it would be a good time
to get to work on the chassis as well and clean all the rust off and put some rust
proofing on it. Eventually everything was finished, and the new truck had its old but
new engine. Now all we had to do was set it on fire.
19

Roaming home

Not intentionally of course. Setting your truck on fire is optional. I had covered the
windscreen with newspaper to protect the glass from welding sparks while I welded
covers over the roof vents, which leaked. My wife was reading a book as I was welding
and her job was to make sure nothing caught on fire. Just the one job. As I was welding,
I smelt burning foam material and lifted my welding mask and freaked as flames began
pouring out of the open window. My wife was sitting there still reading her book, so I
give her this look, and I’m sure you know the kind of look it was and I quickly jumped
down and ran for the fire extinguisher in the house. She looked up as I tore past her
and then it was her turn to freak out when she saw the truck cab in flames. I was in
such a rush when I came back out, I tripped over some wood I had left lying around
and sent the fire extinguisher and myself sliding along the garage floor.
I quickly picked myself up, ran and got the extinguisher again and managed to put the
fire out before it did too much damage, but the seat was toast and the lining had all but
melted off the ceiling. Note: fire extinguisher-good.
Not long after that I started designing the box that we would put onto it.

20

Roaming home

CHANGE OF PLANS
Before we had fully kitted out the truck, we had started up a small painting business and
this took more of our time away from the build. We built all the framework between
painting jobs, but things were not going so well with other aspects living on the family
farm and we decided at this point to move away to Auckland to find more work. I had
already built the Luton on the truck but decided to take it off again and just close the
truck in so we could use it like a furniture truck to move us to Auckland.
I don’t know how it is for other folk, but I often make decisions that would be
considered rash by some. But I felt trapped and pushed into a corner. We didn’t have
enough time or money to finish the truck and we had given up on the idea to finish the
house. We now had our third child Suzannah and I could feel the walls of limitation
starting to creep back in. I was already so sick of walking around the house seeing all
the jobs I couldn’t afford to do that staying felt a lot worse than leaving.
We managed to find an overpriced rental house in Ranui, in west Auckland and through
a cousin of Serena’s, we managed to get a contract doing up apartments. Serena was
home with the kids most of the time, which she found difficult for a country girl, and
we put the two older children in school. They hated it and the conformity of wearing
shoes, so like magic, their shoes would constantly disappear till I made them go find
them.
The work was hard to do in Auckland as high-rise buildings meant a lot of carrying
things up flights of stairs and elevators. Sometimes I was struggling with that a bit, but
the money was good.
However, I didn’t really enjoy working by myself as much now and I started talking to
another painter I met who introduced me to someone who could give me regular work
and not have to keep going to the city. He had work at a school not far from where we
were living so this suited me a lot better and having company to work with was a bonus.
Sometimes he would have enough work on that he would hire another guy to help as
21

Roaming home

well. Sadly, he came to work one day with a terrible flu and I ended up getting so sick, I
couldn’t work for 5 weeks. We started going backwards financially and by the 6th week
we decided we had to go back to Whangarei to the farm to recover, as at least there, we
weren’t paying high Auckland rental costs.
I figured perhaps the break away from family might have helped me look on things
differently and perhaps being back on the farm on Kaiatea would be ok. But it hadn’t
changed a bit and I was soon dreaming of traveling and escape again. We carried on
with painting jobs once we had settled again and I was well enough to work. I hired a
couple of guys I knew to help when the workload got too big, and this helped a great
deal but is also meant we didn’t earn a lot from the jobs.
The truck sat there as a reminder of what should be, but wasn’t, and my mind started
going back to the dream of traveling once again. The first job was to take the ply off the
front part and re-weld the Luton back on to create the bedroom above the cab.
This was relatively quick as most of the welding work was already done and before we
knew it, we had it closed in again. Now came the interior. Everything had to be
designed from scratch. Cabinets had to be built, bunks for the kids, a place to sit and a
table and when I got beds in for three children, a shower and a toilet in such a small
space, I began to have some serious doubts as to how this was ever going to work. It all
seemed roomy enough when it was empty but get some people in there and things we
would need to live and it started to feel very cramped.
But it was all we had so we kept working on it until finally one day in 2016 we were
mostly finished and then just like that, I lost the desire to travel. Partly from fear and
the thought that what I really wanted was a house, a wife, kids and a shed to potter in.
In a sense that was the right thing, the programming I had been chasing my whole life
and I already had these so why let it go? But then I remembered that we didn’t actually
own the house we were still investing in itand it still wasn’t finished. We had invested in
the potential, but we had no promised title and so much more to do. It was a reminder
that in fact our only real tangible dwelling that we could say was truly ours alone was
the truck.
But it sure wasn’t what I thought I wanted, at least not initially, so reluctantly I finished
the truck with the thought that, perhaps I could sell it and use the money from it to get
22

Roaming home

a title on the house and get with the program.
I always liked to look at options just in case something didn’t work out and I started
seeing the truck as a means to fulfilling my original plan to own our own house, so we
listed the truck on trade me to see if we could sell it. A couple came to have a look,
who were doing Book-a-Batch. They had a boat on their property that they had turned
into accommodation so they thought a truck would have been a nice edition. Or they
could even just have a traveling home for themselves if they chose.
We sat in the truck for a while with them and then let them have some space by
themselves to see if it had what they felt they wanted. It did feel very homely inside and
invited you to travel and explore and they seemed keen on it, so I was quite surprised
when they turned it down and said that they felt it was for our family and we should
keep it. It felt strange to hear them say this because I wasn’t looking for a prophetic
statement about our future, but what they were saying felt true, whether I wanted it to
be or not.
I felt despondent again because it meant I had to give up the house ownership dream
again. The thing I didn’t want, but wanted because I was supposed to want it. I felt a bit
bitter because I had invested so much of everything in this home that would never be.
Sure, it would be nice to go traveling and experience the gypsy way of life for a bit, but
walking away from all that work was gutting. I had so much turmoil about everything.
I didn’t mind the gypsy traveling thing in general, the idea of it, but I had begun to
realize, I sure didn’t want to be one. We took the truck down to the beach one day to
get a feel of staying in it for the night, and I had built a folding deck on the back
thinking “I could sit out there in the evening and watch the stars and listen to the sound
of the waves.” It was just starting to get dark when we pulled in and I noticed this bus
parked there with icky hippy dressed people and shabby dressed kids and I realized that
we had now become one of them. The misfits that didn’t really belong anywhere, either
by choice or necessity. The non-conformists that probably smoked lots of pot and ran
naked through the moonlight smelling of incense. I didn’t really know but it’s easy to
judge when you have nothing to go by, except what you read in books about the hippy
days. To me, they weren’t the gypsies I had read about. The Romanies. The real gypsies.
These were the counterfeits, the common sort, created in the 60s. I barely
23

Roaming home

acknowledged them as we settled in for the night.
It was a terrible night for me. The waves were noisy, it was hot and humid. I felt
trapped in a life I didn’t know I even wanted, and I felt like I couldn’t breathe. I
grabbed a blanket and a pillow and went outside and slept on the deck of the truck. I
was not a happy camper.
In the morning I just wanted to go back to the house and play in my shed with my tools
and pretend it was not my reality and that we would stay here in the house but in my
heart, I couldn’t deny that this was our new destiny. When we got back home, I looked
around at all the tools I had. I was going to miss them but there was no way I could
take these with me. I had tools for almost every job from saws to welders and
everything else you could think of, and now I would only have room for what I could
fit in a carboard box under the kitchen bench. I was mortified about the prospect of
deciding what to take and what to leave. This was my MacGyver workshop. Every tool
I needed was here, either bought or made for a specific job and I had to leave it all. I
went inside and sulked for a week.
The next week we had a painting job in town to do and I heard from Philip James that
he was now traveling and would be up our way so would come for a visit. They had not
long ago been interviewed for a tv program called 7 Sharp about their choice to sell up
everything and start traveling with their young family. Phillip had been suffering from
panic attacks and health issues for a while and his doctor had said if he didn’t do
something soon, he might not be alive very long. Pretty motivating stuff. Like me, Phil
was a little reluctant about the idea at first, but as he started building his bus house, he
began to see the charm in it. He was working as an electrical draftsman but had quickly
been putting his focus into web design so he could find a way to support him and his
family on the road. Since he was coming to park up with us at the house it seemed a
good idea to give him some work painting while he was with us as we both would
benefit from the income and companionship.
It was great hanging out with him and his wife, and our kids loved playing with theirs. I
couldn’t have asked for a better introduction to living life on the road as like us they
were still exploring the whole concept and like us they also had people who didn’t like
the choice they had made to travel full time. I think it was the fact that I could see these
24

Roaming home

were everyday ‘normal’ people choosing to live differently and own their new life
choices, that it made me think that perhaps we could do this. It was starting to turn a
little cooler now and we had decided we would camp together at the beach since we had
finished the painting job. I had recently put a wood burner I had built to heat a spa
pool, into the truck with a small hot water cylinder.
I thought, how cool to use it when we were parked at the beach. Smoke lazily coming
from the chimney as we sat snug inside listening to music with the sound of the waves
in the background. Well, that is what I imagined as I didn’t know what one was
supposed to do when being a gipsy, although I certainly didn’t feel that this was what I
was. My understanding was that you traveled a lot. What you did in between I hadn’t
the foggiest idea.
I did learn however, that you don’t need a great big wood burner in a small truck. I had
used a truck exhaust pipe for the flue and when I got the fire going, flames shot out of
the smokestack rather than the lazy smoke I had imagined. It looked cool, I thought. Of
course, Phil thought it was hilarious. The truck got so hot I took my shirt off and then I
had to go outside as did everyone else. It must have looked a sight as we all stood on
the deck in the cold, while looking at the chimney with flames shooting out of it.
Eventually it died down enough that it was bearable inside. I noticed that night that
because the fireplace was so close to the shower, that the plastic shower lining on that
side had all buckled from the heat. In the end I took the fireplace out and just made the
shower and toilet bigger and it was a lot better fit for me and Serena having a normal
size shower. For heating we ended up just lighting the gas stove for a while and the
truck warmed up fine, although not all that healthy and we did end up getting a lot of
condensation. Eventually I did build a smaller fireplace that sat on the bench and this
worked better.
We also got a gas calafont for heating the water which was much simpler. We were now
starting to get used to living in the truck full time and eventually rented the house out to
my niece, who I had collected from Oamaru in the South Island, as they wanted to
move north. For a while this helped a lot as we had little income and I was now
receiving a benefit as my health was at the point where even climbing up ladders was a
problem. Neither of us knew how to support ourselves while traveling.
25

Roaming home

Not much call for traveling farmers or painters I thought, although we did pick up one
job plastering and framing a cabin in Kaiwaka whilst we were parked at my sister’s
house. We didn’t really have any idea where to go so most of the time we would just
park at the farm or down at the grand parents, or around the corner from our house
where there was a hill side paddock overlooking the valley.
The transition from house to small box on wheels was pretty life changing stuff. Just
getting rid of all the excess baggage one collects over a lifetime is almost overwhelming.
Then there are the things that we think we can’t possibly do without, but have to make
the decision to leave behind. For us, this process was as important and as challenging as
building the truck. I never thought this first step in the process would be such an
agonizing one. But it was the first step. Asking yourself what really matters to you and
why.
It’s not easy to re-examine one’s values and beliefs, because we invest heavily in them
and we try to live true to them all our lives. For some of us it’s a big part of who we are.
It’s uncomfortable to suddenly throw the whole lot up in the air to see what we want to
keep and which to leave behind. It felt like I was losing some of myself, or what I
perceived as myself, in the process.
Even things like keep-sakes, ornaments, gifts, memorabilia, and pets all come under
scrutiny and some of those that sneakily made it aboard the good ship Lollipop ended
up being culled somewhere down the road.
For my wife this was a hard time because she had lived on the same road all her life
with relatives next door and her beloved horse Ranger. She also had never been out on
her own. There was also our kid’s mountain of toys. To a child it seems that everything,
large or small has a special place in their hearts and is crucial to their health and
happiness. But gradually things started to come together and find their place.
One of my biggest fears was that my kids might end up going hungry. I was standing at
the kitchen sink in the old house looking out over the family farm, worrying about this
quite a bit one day and a quiet voice seemed to whisper to me, your kids won’t starve. I
almost cried not realizing how much I was afraid they would. But I decided to just trust
that it was true and I put that fear aside, for a while at least.
26

GOODBYE

We left our old place and slowly wound along the road till we got to the main road at
the bottom of Kaiatea road and came to a bumpy stop at the bottom. There wasn’t a lot
of fanfare when the day finally came and we said our goodbyes and drove away. This
was the beginning of what had seemed an impossibility, or perhaps stupidity, and
turned into reality. For good or bad we were now travelers.
As I started to get up speed along the main road, I realized that I was still in low gear,
27

Roaming home

so I had to pull over again, climb under the truck and kick the leaver into high as I had
no other way of doing it. Serena pulled in behind me to see if I was ok. I told her about
the problem and then we started off again. Elizabeth sat in the front with me, excited,
sad, and worried about the journey as we continued on again. I tried to grin some
reassurance that I didn’t feel. Our first night’s stay was in a carpark in Whangarei by the
waterfront where all the yacht’s from overseas would berth for a night or more before
heading off doing their own version of what we were doing.
I felt an affinity with them and still do, as much of the lifestyle is quite similar, especially
the living space and amenities. I fancied the idea of traveling the oceans and being free
to roam, powered by the wind without a care in the world, but that’s just a fanciful
dream I’m sure, because you never really escape the worlds influence no matter what
means of transport you use and then there are the elements to contend with and you
can never escape yourself. Staying in the truck in town, close to public view, felt strange
and a little embarrassing. Sometimes I grabbed my guitar and sat on the deck like I was
going to play something because I thought it was somehow expected. But I just
strummed quietly to myself. In my mind I was imagining what it would seem like to
people who were living ‘the normal life’.
I know what I thought when I saw people living as we now did. But we also started to
notice that many people seemed quite friendly and curious, some even envious of the
life we were now living as though it were something special. Woman especially seemed
attracted to the idea. Some men seemed a little interested, if dragged close by with the
aid of their partners but I secretly think a lot of men just felt sorry for me or thought I
was a bit odd or didn’t know how I could live in such a small space let alone with three
kids. But men who owned yachts and were used to living in their transportation seemed
to understand.
I admit that I felt odd. Like I didn’t really belong in this new life we had created for
ourselves. I had nothing to compare it with, no box to tick. We weren’t homeless as
such, we weren’t hippies. My pot smoking experimental days were long gone. We
weren’t staying in a campground and we weren’t on vacation. We just existed in the
moment. I am sure others could have found the label that best fit their understanding
of what we were. Perhaps bums, vagrants, or something of that nature. But for me it
was just a family of five trying to make sense of a life we now had that was entirely ours
28

Roaming home

and I was scared to death about how we were going to survive as a family this way. In
my heart, I already felt like I had failed a plan or agenda someplace and this was the
result. We didn’t stray too far from home initially, but one of the first big journeys we
did take, was towards Waihi to visit an un-schooling camp in the Karangahake gorge,
run by Lucy Aitkenread and her family. A place Phillip had suggested, and paid for us to
attend.
I had no idea what an un-schooling camp was about so I thought this would be a good
opportunity to learn more about it. My wife had been home schooled and had done
much of her schooling through correspondence whilst I had attended public school in
Auckland, so we both had quite different experiences to compare it with. At the threeday camp it seemed to me it was more about having fun than learning and I couldn't see
how the two were connected. But the Kids got to spend a good amount of time with
other children, so I was happy for that at least.
On the last day we got to participate in some workshops which were basically small
groups of people discussing certain topics of choice. I chose a men's group to discuss
men's views and experiences around home schooling. I had quite a few questions about
whether it was a good thing or not and how to deal with the nagging feeling that my
children would grow up uneducated. To me it felt as though I was doing a tremendous
disservice to my kids and that they would end up with little or no job prospects later in
life. My little dumb dumbs in tattered clothes, hands out, begging like Oliver twist.
As it turned out, many of the home-schooling mom's and or dads we spoke to, used to
be teachers in mainstream schools, who being disillusioned and frustrated by a system
that couldn’t change, turned to homeschooling instead. This helped ease my fears a little
bit, however, I felt they had the advantage of knowledge and experience that we just
didn't have. How could we give our kids a good education?
We probably left with more questions than answers and I can't say that I understood
un-schooling any better. In fact, it was more confusing as I tried to put it all together in
a way that fitted with my concept of learning. Even the term un-schooling didn’t seem
to fit where our children were at. My eldest daughter only had one term in a primary
school at that point and that wasn’t a great experience for her. She had even gone
missing one day when she didn’t get off the school bus and a driver dropped her off in
29

Roaming home

town. It was three hours before a parent of another child brought her back to the
school and the driver of the bus was adamant she was never on his bus.
As best we could, we just tried to keep up a routine with them doing scholastic exercise
books that we purchased from shops and mostly we just taught reading, using phonics,
and doing a little math.
Like a lot of people, I don't have fond memories of my school days but it was a bit like
a rite of passage in a way just getting through it. It's hard to not be loyal to it or at least
the ideals of it when it's all you know. Probably one of the biggest failures of
mainstream education, in my opinion, is it sometimes discourages free thinking and
encourages conformity to ideals that may not be helpful or even useful for modern life,
again in my opinion, I also think it’s too politically motivated in nature. State schools, in
this climate seem overly pc and try not to offend anyone in minority groups whilst
alienating others who still think a boy is a boy and a girl is a girl. I feel like we are
erasing our own history and gender identity in order to placate all the offended people
and in our race to not offend one group we are offending another without caring about
the long-term implications.
I was glad my kids wouldn’t have to deal with bullies in school, but I was worried they
would meet them as adults and not be able to cope with that. After a while, people I
knew who already had issues with our life style were questioning our teaching methods,
and I was growing increasingly critical of what we loosely termed ‘home schooling’ as
well, and to me we didn’t appear to be doing much at all.
My wife, who had been home-schooled, sadly got the brunt of the criticism from them
and me as well. Some people also made comments about our lack of socialization and
that the kids were missing out. I couldn’t see where they were coming from in regards
to this because I was a loner in school with perhaps only one friend and had been
bullied a lot. I soon discovered however that my kids had been quietly learning things
like computer skills and reading as we traveled. Who would have thought kids could
learn this stuff playing games like Minecraft and having fun whilst they learned? I was
taught that learning was like a job and it wasn’t supposed to be fun.
My wife as often as she could would find an opportunity to teach something at the time
of interest rather than going over and over something in the hopes they would learn.
30

Roaming home

Society in a lot of ways isn’t nice when you think about it and I figured I would rather
they dealt with it when they had a greater sense of self-worth and understanding, than
being thrown to the wolves when they are still figuring things out. I wanted my kids to
know themselves well and have good self-esteem, without bowing to peer pressure so
they don’t end up living lives that others have chosen for them. As I see it, this is our
only earthly life and it can only be done once. It can be liberating and frightening at the
same time.
There are no manuals that precisely fit each one of us or that accurately describes our
nature, our experiences, or our world view as we travel through life, although I think
the bible seems to pretty accurately describe basic human nature when left to our own
devices. Most of the world’s religions and political trends, seem to be geared towards
eradication or suppression of our destructive tendencies, but also of self-thought.
Again, my opinion sorry.
So, even though I didn’t really want to teach differently at first, eventually I could see
that with hands-on guidance on an individual level we had the opportunity to help our
kids explore what they wanted to be, and let them take meaningful steps in that
direction rather than forcing them down the same path as everyone else.
On the way back we stopped in the Ngatea Council Carpark to empty the toilet and
grey water tank and I noticed that the corner of the building was under repair from
what looked like impact damage from someone running into it. I thought I would give
that a wide birth and in so doing managed to hit a large magnolia branch on the other
side of the driveway and with a huge crack I broke the whole branch off. The Grounds’
Keeper helped me lift it off the driveway and seemed to think I had done everyone a
favor. I suspect, it was in trying to avoid the tree that people got too close to the
council building to begin with. Job done, customer happy, I emptied the tanks while the
kids played in the park while our traveling companions enjoyed themselves at my
expense.

31

Roaming home

Branch pruning completed
Afterwards we thought we would visit Serena's cousins in Auckland and we parked our
hippiness in her upmarket Lynnfield driveway. We dropped the deck down and the kids
played whilst we waited for her cousin to get home from work. When she finally came
home, she came to the back of the truck to say hi and Charlie managed to give her a big
wet dog French kiss. We only stayed a couple of days and then we headed back to
Whangarei. We needed to do a few repairs on the house anyway, as well as a catchup
with family. But soon we found ourselves on the move again with a notion that we
would try our hand at fruit picking. We thought we would start with the east coast of
the north island and we set off once again but as we neared the Brynderwyns, we
managed to blow a tire.

32

Roaming home

It was such a loud bang I thought something had broken and I looked out of the side
mirrors to see if I had left anything lying on the road, like the engine. The road was
busy and because I couldn’t move very far over, I had to be careful getting out of the
cab.
It was a flat right rear tire, and in the traffic, I couldn’t do a thing about it. We weren’t
too far from my sisters, so we decided to just carry on as I still had one tire ok on that
side as the truck had dual wheels. I eased back into the flow of traffic, but I inevitably
got many irate drivers build up behind me as I had to reduce my speed so as not to put
too much stress on the remaining tire.
I noticed a car looking impatient behind me and tried to hug the left as much as
possible to let it past when I could. I was rewarded by the usual single finger salute and
abuse from the driver.
It makes me mad that people are so impatient these days but they didn’t know why I
was traveling slowly, and I could hardly explain it, so I just kept going until we got to a
passing lane and I could slow right down to let more traffic past.
Finally, we made it to the top of the Brynderwyns and I carefully navigated the steep
hill down the other side, trying to not use my brakes any more than I had to, but it
wasn’t easy. When they get too hot, they become less effective, and the hand brake is
only related to the drive shaft and not the wheels so if I had to use it going down this
steep hill it would just loosen itself and I would have to adjust it back up as it’s really
only a holding brake not a stopping one. Thirty minutes later we pulled into my sister’s
driveway in Kaiwaka and every one was relieved to have made it in one piece.
But all these incidences were eroding my confidence in the truck and I increasingly was
worried about the journey. We stayed with my sister for a week and called out a tire
mechanic to come and fix or repair our tire. It needed replacing in the end so we paid
$300 for the job to be done. I had never changed the rear tire of a dual wheel truck
before so I had no idea what to do or I would have done it myself. It looked straight
forward, as I watched with interest and envy as the man pulled out a set of nice tools
for the job.
A few days later we said goodbye to my family and started heading south again towards
33

Roaming home

Napier. As we got to the intersection at the end of my sister’s road, I pressed down on
the brakes and nothing happened. I pumped the brakes furiously and then they worked
with a grinding noise on the left side. “Now what… I waited for cars to go buy and
thought about it. I couldn’t stay here and I couldn’t turn around because of cars behind
me, so I had to pull into the traffic.
I released the brake and the truck moved forward again. I put the brake back on and it
stopped again but still with the faint grinding noise. I thought about the smell of hot
brakes coming down the Brynderwyns and I had a mental picture of one of the brake
shoes losing its pad. These are supposed to be riveted on in trucks but I’ve noticed that
in smaller trucks some are just glued on and not riveted and so they come off when
they get really hot. I didn’t have a lot of options at this point. I could go back to my
sisters or just carry on and get it fixed the first chance I got. I chose to carry on despite
the brake pad, as I couldn’t get a replacement in Kaiwaka anyway and I didn’t feel that
confident doing the job myself with so few tools. Besides what if it was something
more than that? I didn’t want to find out. For the next 3 hours I basically hardly used
the brakes at all and just used gears as much as possible to slow me down and only used
the brakes at the very last moment.
It worked and we got to the Drury truck dismantler’s where I hoped they would have
what we needed. I don’t know why I felt that this would be the place to go, but like
many times on this trip I just felt led to go certain places and when we did, things just
seemed to work out.
We pulled in and I explained what had happened and of course they were flat out busy
so I parked in a side driveway and thought I might as well borrow their tools and take
the wheel off to at least get things ready. One of the workers saw me trying to jack the
front up with my tiny jack and appeared shortly after with a massive air jack which he
slid under the front of the truck. Within 5 seconds the whole front was off the ground.
I was grateful I didn’t have to use my tiny jack and happily chucked it back into the cab.
I undid the nuts and managed to leaver the brake drum off with a screwdriver and a
hammer on the opposite side of the drum. They can sometimes be a little tight as the
clearance between the brakes and the drum is small so the drum has to be pulled of
pretty strait or it jams. Serena decided she would take the kids for a walk while I
worked.
34

Roaming home

When I got it free the bonded pad that should have been glued to the shoe fell on the
ground. The boss of the yard came out to have a look and was not surprised to see it.
They also noted that the seals had been leaking as well as there was quite a lot of brake
fluid contamination on the shoes. We had a very limited amount of money left.
Not enough for the shoes and replacement seals. He thought a bit and then said he had
an idea and went back into the workshop. Twenty minutes later he emerged with a set
of shoes. “I remembered I had some stuff for these trucks’ way in the back. We don’t
have much call for them anymore. You can have these for half price but I will get one
of the boys to put a couple of rivets in it first. But the seals will need to be gotten in.
We agreed and then rang Serena’s mother to see if we could borrow some money to pay
for the job to be done as well as parts.
I hated asking her family for money again, but we didn’t have any choice. By rights we
should have replaced the shoes on both sides since one side had been leaking but we
just couldn’t afford it and didn’t want to borrow more than we had to, so we left it.
That afternoon the parts arrived and were fitted, and we carried on our journey. But
first we had to find a place to stay the night as it was getting late, and the kids were
hungry. We found a freedom camping spot in Te kauwhata and stayed there the night,
relieved that we now had good brakes, at least on the one side. I didn’t want to think
about what condition the other side was in. I figured I was depressed enough for one
day.
The kids got to playing as soon as we parked up and Charlie the dog would go and play
with them as though they were all one little pack. I didn’t actually want a dog but
Serena's moms’ dog had gotten pregnant so we were offered one of the pups. She had
bought one of the pups over when she came for a visit and I looked at it and thought
Charlie would be a good name because it looked a little like a king Charles spaniel. But
because I named it there seemed to be a consensus that I must have wanted a dog
because before I knew it, we had Charlie as a pet. I didn’t want him inside the house at
the time so I got an outside pen for him and gave him an old pillow to sleep on. But he
howled so much and just tore the pillow to shreds. I tried to make the kids responsible
for him, but they couldn’t seem to keep it in the cage kennel we made as he would just
keep digging his way out.
35

Roaming home

I just couldn’t see how such an animal would ever get used to living in a house truck.
He also used to nip people’s fingers when they came around and it took a long time to
get him to stop doing it. But eventually he became part of the family.
The next morning, we started heading south again and stopped at a service station just
before the turn off to state highway 2 through to Tauranga and Rotorua. I didn’t want
to keep buying fast food, but it was hard getting into the routine of cooking sometimes
as we were constantly on the move and at the end of the day both of us were usually
too tired to cook. We gassed up both vehicles and hit the road again.
I had figured out a way to change to high and low gears using a stainless-steel cable, a
boat pulley and a handle made of metal shaped like a T. I also put a return spring on the
back of the gear box lever so when I released the T stick in the cab the spring would
pull the gear lever backwards to the low position again. It sounds complicated but it was
quite simple and really helped when we needed to get up a steep hill. Our top speed was
only about ninety km per hour if there was no head wind but as soon as we got to any
sort of steep hill, we had to go down to low gear. We weighed the truck once and we
were close to 8 tons which was the maximum weight we could carry so with only a 3liter motor I wasn’t surprised it was a case of ‘I think I can I think I can,’ until we got
over the hill before ‘Ha, I knew you could.’
As we made our way down the east coast, I felt like I wasn’t really looking forward to
seeing new things and all I felt I was doing was escaping old things. All the frustrations
and disappointments were just chasing me around the country wanting to be listened
too and I just didn’t want to think about them. Keep moving, that is what I told myself
and it’s mostly what I did. Looking back, I feel sorry for dragging the family to so many
places only to stay one night then take off again as soon as it got light. I guess I had
some stuff to work through and one thing I knew was these things take time.
We traveled though Katikati and decided to stay the night and have a breather for the
kids’ sake and visit the local pools. The kids had a blast in this camper friendly town.
Sometimes I drove around little towns to have a look at the layout and see if there were
any hidden gems that you couldn’t see from the road just passing through them. I
explored back alleys and parks as we traveled because after a while one town looks like
another town and they begin to blend together in your mind unless you can find things
36

Roaming home

that stick out in your memory. In Katikati I remember losing one of serena’s Bonsai
trees off the back of the truck when I went over some speed bumps. We didn’t notice
until we were many miles away and serena went to water them. I felt sorry for her as she
only had a couple left. It reminded me again how much we had left behind.

Serena’s bonsai collection

37

Roaming home

We kept going down the country and as we neared Taupo, I blew another tire. This
time we were on a passing lane going up a big hill. At least I wasn’t holding up traffic.
My jack is far too small for the job and I can only pump the handle 10 times before it’s
at the end of its’ reach and I have to block up the axle and take another go at it. But bit
by bit I get it high enough off the ground.
I have the spare ready to go and as soon as the traffic slows down, I quickly change the
wheel and do up the nuts. It’s frustrating as this is our third flat tire now. When we get
under way again, I notice that the hand brake doesn’t have much left in it on the hill
start and I make a mental note to get it re-adjusted again. When we get to Taupo, we
find a tire place to get the puncture fixed and Serena, who follows behind in the car
pulls in beside me. She tells me she had to stop along the way because one of the girls
was choking on a steel nut she had been sucking on. Why do kids have to suck on
everything they find? Give any child a marble and it seems the first thing they do is pop
it in their mouth. At least with marbles I know they come back out just fine. I was
unsure about wheel nuts.
The next day we headed for Napier. We applied for work picking fruit and waited to
hear back on any job offers. We waited and waited, wondering why the places that were
so desperate for workers never called. So, in the end we went on to Hastings and stayed
there for a while and waited some more since we didn’t have any job offers as yet and
not many places we could stay, since Hastings only had three freedom camping spots
and each only had a 3-day limit, we decided to head to the coast and hang out at the
beach for a while. We decided on Pourerere Beach. It was the most amazing place for
me. It had zero cell coverage and was just this long desolate beach where the kids
enjoyed picking up all the Paua shells, that washed ashore in the rough surf.
We stayed there for 6 days, running out of water on the third day so we had to go in the
car to fill some containers from a garage.
I thought a lot during those six days. I didn’t want to be dragging around my hurt
feelings and yet I had some more to deal with up ahead. I was to see a social worker
who was part of the task-force to settle sensitive claims for those who had grown up on
foster care. Without going into too much detail, the meeting was to explore how much
compensation I would receive. It was blood money to me as it hardly compensated for
38

Roaming home

all the things, I had been through as a young man or the consequences attached to the
bad choices one makes as a result. But I knew it would help my family and ease some of
the financial burden we were coping with.
After we left the beach, we finally got a call about some possible work on an apple
orchard but since the accommodation thing hadn’t been resolved we decided to
continue on our journey. We stopped at the Lindsay bush reserve for a night or two and
on the second night we ran out of gas for the stove and the tiny fridge we had. We
couldn’t get any more gas until we got paid again so we tried to use this small chocolate
melting thing that Serena had been given as a gift and placing the small candle
underneath and a cup of coffee on top, we waited and waited. In the end we drank cold
water and left the next day for Norsewood. I had an appointment in Dannevirke so we
thought we would stop in Norsewood for a few nights before traveling to Dannevirke.
The old motel there said we could stay in their grounds, and we appreciated it. In
exchange me and Serena built them a wheelchair access on top of existing stairs so that
their ill father could get up and down the stairs.
The next day we left the kids in the truck and drove to Dannevirke without them as we
didn’t think it was something the kids had to be part of. The meeting lasted about an
hour and you would think $28,000 would get rid of the feelings of hurt. But for the
most part it caused more grief having to relive it all again. Sorry I’m not going into any
details, but each person’s sadness is their own and the family who they share it with.
When we got back to the truck the motel owners said the kids were well behaved, so we
thanked them for keeping an eye on them. In the meantime, we went window
shopping. Norsewood has a great clothing shop, probably the only real shop they have,
and we were looking to travel to the South Island as soon as we could so warm clothing
was a must. We went there every day for about a week as it was the only source of
entertainment apart from the eels that live in the creek next door. We tried on so many
clothes. They were soft possum fur lined most of them, so they were really warm. When
the money finally came through, we spent $800 on clothes the next day. We also gave
some money to the people who hosted us because they didn’t think our work was
sufficient for parking there. I find it hard to see how they could feel hard done by, but I
find in these instances that it’s better to leave people with sweet remembrances of you
so that the next people who might need somewhere to stay will find a willing host.
39

Roaming home

Some people refer to it as a kind of paying it forward, but I just had little room in my
heart for more bad feelings.
The next day we drove to Dannevirke and parked a couple of days in a caravan park,
the first and only time we had done so. I got straight to work buying new tires for the
truck and for the car. We were doing some serious mileage and I was tired of fixing the
12-year-old truck tires that had seen better days. I also got a small computer the size of
your hand and a DVD player so the kids could watch our collection of DVDs for
entertainment.
We also inquired about land prices in Dannevirke since I reasoned maybe buying a
small piece of land would be a good investment in case, we got sick of traveling. But
when we started calculating how much debt we had and what we were paying out each
week it made more sense to just clear most of our debts and with what was left we
decided to be less frugal in our day to day living and enjoy some of the things we denied
ourselves. So went out and bought a cordless vacuum cleaner.

Our friends Phil and Cindy had returned to their hometown in new Plymouth to take
care of Phil’s ailing mother so we decided we would catch up and headed down to
Palmerston north before traveling up the west coast to New Plymouth.
We stopped at a garage in Palmerston North to refuel and while we were in there, I
noticed a lady standing near the back wall who looked like she was about to cry. I felt
this tug in my heart so went over and asked her if she was ok. She said that she had put
fuel in her car and didn’t realize an automatic payment had gone out and she had
nothing left in her account to pay for the gas. She said “you wouldn’t think I own two
rentals yet can’t afford gas.” I gave her a hug and Serena came out of the loo and did
the same when she found out what had happened. We decided to pay for her gas and
wished her well. It's these moments when you feel the most in touch with what it means
to be a human being. It’s like it acknowledges that somehow, we are destined for a
higher purpose and giving seems to awaken that in us.

40

Roaming home

We decided to have a little shop in Palmerston while we were there and bought an
electric fridge, and a camera for Serena. We ran the fridge off the power when we could
and off a small generator when the power got too low. We had about 600 watts of solar
on the roof so as long as the sun shined, we actually coped pretty well without running
the generator.
We also had a stroll around the shops and stopped to have a coffee at Thorns café run
by a friendly guy named Damien. As we sat there, we watched how he interacted with
all the people who passed by, either asking after their welfare or friendly banter with
regulars. He was a theatrical character who loved acting in local plays and I guess you
could say the world was his stage. After we got chatting to him, we thought about
investing some money in his business and asked him if a $5000 loan with no interest
would be of use to him. I wasn’t really after a return from his business as such but just
wanted to invest in the man, who was so giving in his community. We worked out some
repayment schedule and then left him to figure out how to invest it. Unfortunately, due
to some bad timing and a previous business deal that had gone sour he ended up going
bankrupt. It was a risk I know but it’s that way when you invest in someone or
something. You never really know how it will go but it’s always a good practice to
invest in something, even if it’s just yourself.
Eventually we carried on with our journey to New Plymouth again to see the James’s
family. We really wanted to just head south but they had been such a big
encouragement for us to travel that they were like family to us, so we really wanted to
catch up first. When we met up with the Phil, they were at the local pool, so we hung
out with them for a few days and the kids got a chance to see their friends again and
enjoy a swim.
They also had another traveling family with them in a huge bus so there were more kids
for ours to play with. After a while they suggested we go and hang out at the Oarkara
beach which was fine to me as the pool was in the center of town. I liked the more
peaceful location, and we stayed there a couple of days before we decided to head even
further down the west coast to Rahutu. There is a lighthouse along the coast that we
stayed there in a sheltered paddock with the other bus people who followed along.

41

Roaming home

Lighthouse car park Taranaki

One morning I woke up and got a feeling like I needed to go down to the boat ramp
just below the lighthouse. I had a dream about fishing in a boat that day and so I just
went down there to see what that was about. The next minute a guy turned up to
launch his boat, so I offered to hold his boat for him while he parked the car. In return
he offered to take me fishing as soon as his brother arrived. I went and got my fishing
rod and came back and we both waited for his brother and chatted a little.
He worked at the refinery and was having a day off. When his brother arrived, we all
jumped aboard and shot off out to sea. The west coast can be rough sometimes and
getting out and in through the narrow river entrances can be dangerous so we would
42

Roaming home

only have an hour or so before the tide turned and coming back in would be even more
so. We got to the edge of the reef just off shore and everyone quickly got their lines in
the water. I only had a surfcaster, so I just fished with the bottom half of it but still
managed to catch some snapper as did we all.
The boat was a small aluminum one that rocked something terrible in the swell. One
reason I prefer a bigger boat is the cork like movement of small boats as they bob about
on the top of the sea makes me feel seasick. But I hung in there for just over an hour
before we decided it was enough and headed back. We caught a wave in and pretty
much rode it safely into the entrance probably at just the right time before things got
too rough. I thanked them for letting me come and then walked away with a snapper
for the family. It was a strange experience, but it felt like it was played out the way my
dream had painted it.

Fishing off the coast

43

Roaming home

This is the way I feel guided sometimes with pictures or dreams that carry a weight to
them. I got back to the truck with the fish and started to scale it and fillet it. About 20
minutes later, the guy who took me fishing pulled up in his Ute and handed me 4 more
snapper to share with our traveling friends.
It was a great feeling to be able to share with everyone the profits of a few hours labor.
I was still feeling seasick a bit so Mike from the other bus offered to gut and clean all
the fish. I was relieved and went and had a lie down. I had enough excitement for one
day.
Me, Phil and mike decided we would go for a drive the next day and have a look at a
spot further down the coast that might be a good parking spot. When we got there, we
thought about perhaps heading up the mountain ranges instead and back to new
Plymouth. Phil was still pretty much tied to the care and well-being of his mother, so
we agreed and all drove convoy style up the mountain. It was a little steep and I spent a
lot of time in the lower gears as did mike whose huge bus was struggling a bit as well.
Some of the turns were pretty tight as we got closer to the summit.

We stayed here a night and had free hot showers, courtesy of the doc camp until they
ran out of gas. Mike went to see if he could find the gas bottles in case, they could just
be swapped for another full one but in the process, set off the alarm system so we all
just waited around for the police to turn up and explain to them what had happened.
They were pretty understanding which was good but it made the experience less
enjoyable.
The next morning, we headed down again and we decided that it was time we hit the
road and begin making our way south. We said goodbye in New Plymouth. It was a bit
sad leaving them and it would have been great to journey together but everyone had
places they had to be and responsibilities. All I felt I needed to do was go south and be
with my family and have a family adventure. Before we left New Plymouth though we
stopped at the Warehouse and got the kids some snow boots before continuing on and
stopping in Waverly the night at the campground. The family had a ball walking along
the coast under high cliffs and sandstone caves.
44

Roaming home

Waverly cliffs

We stayed here for a few days and enjoyed the peace and quiet and just being free
together. The camp was cheap, and it was expected you would just pay at a local dairy in
an honesty system. We could have stayed longer but I was getting restless again and
wanted to get going. I had already booked the ferry tickets and my youngest was excited
to get on the Ferry.
We drove all day the next day and stopped just on the outskirts of wellington but we
weren’t scheduled to sail for a few days so I was not sure what we would do in
wellington while we waited so I decided to just re-book the ferry for that night and just
keep going. We arrived at 8.30 pm and parked in the ferry terminal and waited for the
2am sailing. I couldn’t sleep that well as I kept thinking we would sleep in and miss it.
Eventually I heard the shuddering noise of the ferry pulling into dock and I went into
45

Roaming home

the terminal to get our boarding passes. It was turning colder. I navigated the truck
onto the ramp and up to the second deck with Serena following behind in the car. The
kids were excited to finally be there. Suzannah was a bit put out that the ferry was just a
boat instead of a giant fairy with wings that was going to transport us to the South
Island.
Me and Serena were done in when we made it on board to the lounge area and just
wanted to sleep. I guess we must have looked beat too as a steward offered us a free
cabin for the crossing and we were so happy to except. We bundled the kids into their
bunks and fell asleep to the gentle rolling motion of the ship as we left the north isl

46

LAND HO

We awoke about an hour before we arrived at Picton and the kids where just able to see
the landscape appearing in the early dawn. When we finally arrived at the Picton, the
kids were so excited to think they had arrived on a different island. The first place we
went to when we arrived was the water park on the foreshore. They got absolutely
soaked. Luckily, we had spare clothes in the car.
Once everyone was well watered, we drove to a park-over property in Koromiko. We
pulled in and parked the truck and began the cleanup that usually happens after a long
drive with things shifting or falling from wherever they can. We got the kids out playing
and I paid the custodian the $5 camp fee. Then after a quick breakfast me and Serena
jumped into bed and left the kids to play whilst we slept. It was only for a couple of
hours but was much needed.
The next day we took the car back to Picton and the kids enjoyed a few hours at the
water park getting soaked again while we did the washing. Afterwards we had a look
around the Picton township. There wasn’t anything particularly special about Picton, as
far as the town was concerned but the location is spectacular with its pristine coast
views. Just being here and the newness of everything kept us all grinning for a while and
we felt we had escaped the madness of the North. We even attempted a walk above the
Township which seemed like it would have been a nice view of Picton. It was a tough
forty-minute slog dragging two kids and carrying Suzy up to the summit. But the view
was worth the effort. Now we just had to get down again.

47

Roaming home

View over Picton

When we got back to the truck, I met the owner of the property where we were
parked. He seemed to have a tremendous amount of knowledge when it came to
engineering. He looked the truck over and suggested that I put a support bar from the
bumper to the bottom of the Luton as he said the South Island roads were uneven in
places, perhaps due to the earthquake and he thought it might stress the steel too much.
We found a suitable piece of pipe in his scrap pile and went to work for a few hours in
his shed. Boy, I was envious of his tools. There was everything you could ever need or
want, and the best was a full-size metal lathe. We chatted for hours about this and that.
Les was self-taught and I think he did a good job, with the knowledge he had. One of
the good things about the support pole, at least as far as the kids wore concerned, was
that it was great to swing off.
48

Roaming home

We stayed about three days in Koromiko then decided to meet up with some friends
from Germany who were traveling in their car around the South Island at the same
time. They had come to stay with us initially in the WWOOF’ing program and we
became friends. The drive to meet them took us along a windy coastal path through to
Momorangi Bay. The sun shone and glinted on sparkling clear water along the coast.
Our friends had almost finished their New Zealand journey and were heading to
Australia so it was a chance to say our good buys, knowing we would not likely see
them again.
This is quite common with Wwoofing people where you connect, sometimes very
personally, and then have to say goodbye. Sometimes we get an occasional email or text
but as the distance grows so too does time between contact. We stayed there a night
and then said goodbye and headed back to Koromiko.

49

Roaming home

We decided the next day that we would like to continue our own travels, so we got up
early and prepared for the next leg of our journey, this time to the west coast via St
Arnaud on highway 63. We said good bye to Les and Christine the custodian of the
camp and continued our way. Blenheim didn’t have much appeal to me, so we stopped
for a look at a market, had some lunch and continued on our way traveling west
through the Wairau valley.
We were a little concerned when we saw a sign saying no fuel for miles as we didn’t fill
up before we left. The gauge said half a tank left and Serena's was about the same so we
thought we would just risk it and hope for the best.
We had already left Blenheim behind, and I didn’t want to back track. We stopped at
Saint Arnaud for fuel with gas to spare. We need not have worried. It reminded me of a
similar sign in Kaiwaka in the north island. It said last cheese for miles. Seriously, who
cares about cheese? Technically it was true but left you feeling as though you were
leaving civilization.
We stopped for a night at a spot just off the main road and drove inland to Howard
Forest where we could do some gold fossicking. We didn’t have anything to fossick
with but we had a walk along the creek anyway to see if we could see anything. The kids
managed to get quite wet and enjoyed themselves and as it got dark and cold so we
enjoyed a small fire. In the evenings we sometimes had to turn the electric heater on in
the truck which we ran off our generator. It only needs to run for about an hour as the
truck, being small didn’t take too long to heat up. In the morning we began our journey
further west to Murchison where we stayed the night at the NZMCA park close to the
township.
Like a lot of these small towns in the South Island, there aren’t a lot of stores but they
generally have most of what you need, although the prices we noticed seem to be
getting dearer the further west we went. We could have gone to nelson first from here,
but we decided that we might do that on the way back. For some reason I was feeling
like I was not really enjoying the experience as much and Serena suggested that we
should attempt another walk with the kids so we headed up the road to the old power
station and I found it quite interesting seeing how the old power station worked. The
walk on the other hand wasn’t quite as much fun as the kids were tired rather quickly
50

Roaming home

and not much interested in walking and seemed more content to argue with each other
and be carried along the track. So, we decided to head back to the truck and carry on
our journey which took us to Westport.
For some reason I was feeling not that great and I couldn’t put my finger on what it
was, but I just felt out of sorts and tired of the trip, but Westport seemed to make me
feel a bit better. The people are friendly and not pretentious. Just down to earth and
helpful. We first stayed at the beach and the kids were happy to be playing most of the
day. We visited the museum, and an old man there told me about the early Westport
days when he was a lad. The conditions were hard and the people harder but there was
always a supportive community and a deep sense of pride. He told me how he carried
his mother out when she died, as his father had already passed away, to a waiting cart to
be taken away for burial. He was just fourteen and the pride he portrayed in his voice at
the privilege of laying his mother to rest touched me.
Westport began as a gold town in the 1600s and then coal was its main source of
income after that. The Stockton mine is still it’s largest coal works. There were also a
cement works but this closed and for a time there was a concern as to how Westport
would keep alive. Thankfully, tourism helped keep the economy going as well as the
remaining mine and business initiatives and retired Aucklander’s who were buying
cheap houses here which helped grow the community as well as increased the need for
better health services.
Westport is fiercely independent and always has been. It takes care of itself, and its
people and you can feel this within the community. We stayed here a week as well as
exploring the Denniston plateau where one of the most incredible feats of engineering
allowed coal to be brought down the steep incline via a cable and large coal skips. This
was the only way up and the only way down before a very steep road was built. If you
died on the plateau, you would likely have come down in your coffin via the incline in
the coal bin.

The buildings around the mine and further up the plateau were in a terrible state. Many
of the houses had been vandalized and some fallen. It was sad to see history lost to the
decay of time. But with lack of funding this happens. They did try to establish a train
51

Roaming home

ride through some areas of the old mine but because of the deaths in the pike river
mine it was canned. They would have had to have a mine safety inspector employed full
time to look after things and at the time it was just not affordable. In its heyday the
Denniston mine boasted a school, a swimming pool, tennis court, hospital, fire
department and many other amenities not seen in other towns in New Zealand at the
time.

Swimming pool in the foreground.
It’s hard to imagine what it would have been like to live there during that time.
Strangely it was with much reluctance that we left Westport to continue traveling south
but we still had so much to see that we felt we should at least try to get to the bottom
of the south. We had spent all the money we had left after bills were paid and we were
still paying the car off so we were back to living frugally again now and we didn’t bother
with things like shantytown and other tourist places that cost money to visit.

52

Roaming home

We visited the Punakaiki pancake rocks and blow holes and stopped at Hokitika for a
few days so the kids could look for Pounamu (greenstone) along the beach where it was
supposed to wash down the river and be deposited, but the kids didn’t really find
anything that looked like the right thing. I found something that I thought might have
been greenstone and it was shiny when I licked it and rubbed it smooth, but it turned
out it was asbestos suspended in rock.
Then we visited Franz Joseph glacier before we began heading over the Haast Pass
towards Wanaka and we stopped along the way at a lookout to have a rest. We put the
deck down so the kids could play on the deck for a while and Elizabeth got out her
Lego.

While we were there, many Asian tourists would turn up and either turn their back to
the stunning view to take a selfie or take photos of themselves sitting next to our kids.
Then they would jump back in their cars and drive away. It was strange to see people so
out of touch with their natural environment and only be thinking of social media, where
no doubt pictures of our kids would materialize on someone’s face book page in China
53

Roaming home

with a caption, look at these weirdo’s.
The next place we visited that stuck in my mind was Kingston. I had hoped to see the
Kingston Flyer steam train, but it seemed it had been retired and sold off. However just
before Kingston was a pullover spot by the river which had a stunning little forest
around with bright autumn leaves. It was a perfect spot to get some washing done and
just enjoy a rest from driving. The following day we drove to Lumsden and stayed there
one night. When we went to fill up our water tanks in the morning, a gentleman came
over to see if the water had frozen. Lucky for us it hadn’t and it was a realization for us
that it was going to get a lot colder. He invited us round to his house that looked like a
junk collectors heaven. He told us that he normally lived in Australia but had come
back to do some work on his place and he asked whether we would like to look after
the place when he left. It was a nice offer, but we just wanted to keep moving.
We were grateful for the warm winter cloths we had bought from Norsewood, but it
didn’t keep the chill out of the truck at night and the further we traveled the more I
kept feeling like I just wanted to go back to Westport. I couldn’t explain it but the
further south we got the more unhappy I became. I turned to Serena one night and told
her I wanted to go back to Westport and that I was sick of traveling south. I couldn’t
explain why I wanted to go back. Sure, I liked the place, but I left because the point of
traveling is to travel. We were in Winton now and so close to the bottom of the South
Island that it seemed to both of us a bit disappointing to turn around now but I felt
adamant that we needed to go back. Besides. Susannah was sick and it was so cold in
our little truck that the heater barely made a difference.
We agreed that we would return to Westport and see if my mood changed if we headed
north. We decided to go a different route so at least we would see more of the South
Island as we journey back. Almost as soon as we started off again heading north, I felt
better, relieved and at peace. But I was also feeling a bit sad that Serena hadn’t got to
the bottom of the south and Fiordland as she would have liked. We drove through
towns small and large until we found ourselves in Hanmer springs where we stayed for
a night and everyone enjoyed the hot pools.

54

Roaming home

Hanmer springs

It was a welcome change from the cold, although quite expensive. The next day we
headed across Lewis Pass towards springs junction then up to Westport.
We were going to stop at the top of Lewis Pass at Saint James’s walkway but as the
night drew closer so did the ice that began to climb up the side of the truck. I was over
the biting cold and decided to forget about it and just drive straight through to
Westport. We passed through Reefton and a heavy fog was hanging in the air giving it
an aery old feel. Some kids were hanging out on the street and I thought it was a strange
place to be hanging out so early in the morning. We arrived in Westport about 3am and
pulled into the parking place right by the beach and quickly fell asleep.
In the morning, the kids enjoyed the beach again and we enjoyed lying in bed listening
to the sound of the waves. I was back and I felt like I had made the right choice
returning but I couldn’t say why.

55

Roaming home

Westport beach

Was it just the cold? Was it a spiritual thing wanting to be back here? After a week we
basically just stayed at the beach or walked around town.
We decided to just explore Westport more and get to know some of the locals. Just
about every shop we went into we found shop keepers willing to take the time to chat
about what they were doing and our travels. The kids especially liked the toy shop
where they would spend an hour or more looking at toys we couldn’t afford while we
chatted with the owner. It turned out that there were a few buildings for sale on the
main street that had been empty a long time. I wondered if it would be possible to rent
one and park at the rear. I thought it might be so we began looking at some empty
stores and found just the right one at 92 Palmerston Street.
56

Roaming home

A massive yellow building that had once been used to hire out and sell machinery. The
contact number was on the door, so we gave the owner a call and within a week we had
our truck parked out the back with a power lead running from the shop and into our
heater in the truck. The building itself was very cold inside and had no ceiling to speak
of but the kids loved the space to play in.
I started feeling out of sorts again at this point and one morning I woke up with a
burning throat, sores in my mouth, a constant cough and tiredness. I lost my appetite
and just wanted to sleep all day. I ended up going to the local hospital for a checkup
and they thought I had the flu so prescribed some antibiotics and sent me away. A week
later I checked in to a local doctor for another opinion as it wasn’t getting any better
and after some tests, he told me I had glandular fever and prescribed a different
antibiotic. He was a straight no-nonsense man with an enormous curly mustache which
he waxed. Gradually after some weeks I began to feel a little better and started walking
every day down the main street to get my body up and about again.
One of the great things we discovered was that in Westport it can rain at night and then
be perfectly sunny during the day only to rain at night again. The weather, I am told by
the locals is quite different to what the west coast is reported to being like on the
weather channels. Once you get down beyond Greymouth you get a bit more rain but
in Westport you generally have more settled or mild weather. It irked some that they all
came under the same weather information as the wetter parts of the west coast.
One morning a local Anglican Minister dropped by and gave us a box of food when he
heard I wasn’t feeling too well, and the owner of the building we were renting brought
over a gas heater for the building. It was kindness I was surprised to see still alive in
New Zealand. Not long after, when I started feeling better, we Bumped into the couple
we had first met in Westport that ran, what was then the art hotel. Lewis and Heather
holland. Through the help of these lovely people, we managed to set up a craft gallery
in the building and called it Art Jam.

57

Roaming home

Westport store front entrance

We even ran some art classes where I found out, or perhaps remembered that I did
enjoy painting once upon a time. On one occasion during a workshop, we had a book
that we all had to create something from, which had pictures of goblins ghosts and
fairies. I’m not sure exactly what I was going for, but they thought I had a little talent.
I’m not so sure but after all it didn’t really matter as the point was to have fun and enjoy
the company of other art-loving people.

58

Roaming home

One day we decided that we would take a trip to Nelson as we were told it was the art
center for the South Island and had a good art supply shop that my wife had been keen
to visit. This I hoped would make up for not managing to reach the bottom of the
south like she wanted. One of the main streets had a horrible camber on it that meant
the top of our truck leaned close to the poles that support the balconies of the old
buildings and I was a little concerned when we went to leave that we would hit one of
the poles.
59

Roaming home

Without power steering it was hard turning the front wheels and a lady had parked
really close to the front of the truck, so I got Serena to keep an eye on the back of the
lady’s car, who was watching closely but didn’t offer to move her car forward.
Unfortunately, Serena didn’t see the back of the truck swing in, as the back overhangs
the rear wheels quite a bit and I had to turn sharply to get out it hit hard on one of the
poles. The storekeeper came rushing out demanding to get my name and license
number as he said the whole building shook and the owner would not be happy about
this. I gave him the details he wanted and feeling unhappy we returned to Westport.
We never heard from the store owner, so I guess no harm was done but it made the trip
unpleasant. We stayed in Westport for two months before we decided we needed to go
back to Whangarei. Partly we missed Serena’s family and mine and partly we missed
traveling with our friends in the north island. I did think if I got the chance I would
perhaps live in Westport or somewhere on the west coast one day as the people just
seemed more real and friendly and the climate, like new Plymouth was bearable. I was
finding that I was getting less able to stand high humidity, which we got a lot of in
Whangarei.
When we started our trek back to Picton we basically did it in one day. We pulled in at
the ferry terminal and waited for the ferry to arrive. The sea was much calmer going
back to Wellington and the kids played in the kid’s movie room while me and Serena
just walked around the ship looking at the scenery until we arrived. We were leaving the
south and I felt a little sad but hoped one day to return.

60

THE RETURN HOME

The first thing we noticed as we departed the ferry was just how much more congested
and busier everything was. It was like everything was closing in on you. I had gotten
used to the less dense population of the South Island already. We began our journey
northward via the most direct route to Whanagrei, via the Napier Taupo highway. We
knew we wouldn’t go back to living in our old house now and in fact we had a new
tenant living in it that paid a little more rent, so it was a little better financially to live. It
was around this time that I felt we needed to borrow the money, if possible, to get the
property subdivided and sell the house. We decided to stay at my sisters in Kaiwaka for
a while to think about the problem.
We informed our tenant we were going to sell the house and she decided to leave and
find a new place. This made things a bit harder again but since we were no longer
traveling much it was workable. We also decided that we wanted to get a bigger truck.
The kids were growing and our youngest, who we had built a shelf bed for near the
ceiling was outgrowing it fast and I had to keep adding to it for her feet. We searched
on trade me until finally we saw a big blue flat deck monster that looked it would be just
the thing.
But unfortunately, it was in Christchurch in the South Island, and you had to have an
HT license to drive it, which neither serena or I had. Thankfully, Mike, who we had met
in new Plymouth, volunteered to fly down with me and drive it back if I paid his airfare.
So, on my birthday we headed to the airport. When I saw the truck in person, I just
basically bought it, and we jumped in and made our slow journey back to Whangarei. It
was awesome and frightening at the same time. It was huge compared to our old Ford
Trader.

61

Roaming home

Lunch stop on the return journey
But I was happy with the purchase, and it was just in time as we had already sold our
current house truck to a kiwi girl who was traveling in the UK but wanted to return to
New Zealand. She agreed to let us live in our old truck until she arrived and this gave us
3 months to buy and completely build a new home from scratch.
At a cost of around $30,000, mostly borrowed from the bank, another $12,000 for
repairs and 3 months solid work and we transformed our new truck into our new home,
with help. Every few days we would post progress photos to friends and Facebook
groups to show how quickly we could build it. We were just as surprised. Everything
seemed to be going so smoothly and efficiently.

62

Roaming home

63

Roaming home

64

Roaming home

65

Roaming home

Finally Completed

When it was finished, the feeling of space was amazingly welcome. So of course, we
revisited some of the things we had left behind, searching for treasures we could now
stuff into the new truck.
The difference between a home of ten square meters and twenty-three square meters is
the difference between functional and comfortable as far as five humans go. As well as
the essential things like kitchen, bathroom, and beds we even added the washing
machine. We could have left that behind or sold it but washing for 5 can be expensive
when there are five sets of everything, and a laundromat can cost anything from $8 to
$20 a load depending on where you are.

66

SECOND FAREWELL

Eventually the truck was finished, and we moved in. I took our old truck and delivered
it to the mother of the girl who had bought it. We said goodbye to our faithful first
home on wheels. It was another sad moment for the kids as we had established
memories in it, and it was like leaving their first home but since we had been building
the new one whilst we still had the old truck the kids managed to transition reasonably
well.
Eventually Serena had to apply for her truck license as I failed the medical. She ended
up doing a course in Auckland, which she could complete in a weekend. We got all the
manuals and she studied hard and then the driving test day came, and she had to drive a
bus around Auckland. She hadn’t even driven the truck much at this point, so she was
pretty nervous about it. We prayed and left the outcome to God, and she passed her
test, even getting a commendation on her test paper, ‘a very good safe driver.’ So that
was nice. It also meant that I could just drive the car with the kids which was great as
often I used to be alone most of the time when I drove our first truck and both of us
appreciated the change.
I have always had an interest in CB radios, and I thought it would be great if we could
talk to each other when we traveled so about this time, as I was looking on trade-me, I
saw that a ham radio operator was selling his equipment. He also had a rather good CB
that had a side band which meant I could get much further signal than normal. This
meant that me and Serena could communicate with each other whilst traveling without
relying on the cell phone as it’s safer than texting and driving. It has been a lot of fun
being able to banter along as though we were traveling together, when we are traveling
in separate vehicles and occasionally, we have conversations with other truck drivers
too. Sometimes though we forgot what channel we were on and other people would be
listening in on our chitchat and once I got caught singing to her. Oh well I’m sure we
provided quite a bit of entertainment for people. Eventually we hit the road again. we
decided that we would go back to my sisters in Kaiwaka for a while as there was some
67

Roaming home

work there for Serena picking strawberries. It was thought we could earn our way back
south again since we no longer had welfare payments or rental income to support us.
How you travel and earn a living is such a diverse and complex part of traveling that I
can’t provide better information than you can find online. One thing I can say from
experience though; that need is indeed the mother of all invention, and when you need
money you always find a way to earn it. There’s always work to be had if you’re ready to
try new things and don’t mind settling down for weeks or months at a time, but if
you’re determined to keep moving, some kind of online work might suit better as long
as you can get internet signal.

Serena saving a Bonsai tree after work

As with fruit picking for us, what was only supposed to be a 6-week short term thing
ended up being around 3 months as then they began the watermelon season. During
this time Serena also managed to get a role in the movie Juniper, as a medic, as she had
an interest in acting. I was so proud of her as she really wanted to do the Lord of the
Rings when they were filming but wasn’t able to. Unfortunately, it was an exceedingly
small shot in the promo of it and it wasn’t used in the feature. But she enjoyed the
experience and that was worth it even if the money wasn’t. Serena was also working on
68

Roaming home

a painting commission for a friend. She paints a variety of subjects, from traditional
landscapes to pet portraits and even classic cars, in a realism, though not photo-realistic
style.

Uretiti Beach

69

Roaming home

Commissions

She mainly sells landscapes, and as she is always taking photos of the beautiful
landscapes we drive through, she has no shortage of material. Eventually the fruit
picking work ran out and we decided to continue our travels south. It was around this
time I reconnected with a friend in Pukekohe who owned a chicken egg farm and we
thought we would drop by for a visit. We ended up staying there for a few months. I
wasn’t feeling very well at this point, so we thought perhaps we would put the kids in
school for a while and they seemed keen to have a try. I think it was a shock for them
after spending so much time with us and not being around their own age group very
much. One day Ellie took her sisters and ran away from school. Then afterwards the
school built a high fence all around it, to keep the kids safe, I guess. But I suspect it was
a little more of a control thing to keep kids in rather than bad stuff out.

70

Roaming home

Patamahoe school

Then one day during a school assembly in which parent’s get to watch performances
and awards for the kids I had a stroke or something that made me feel like I was going
to faint and I had trouble getting my words out. It ended up with a trip to hospital and
an appointment for an MRI scan to determine what had happened.
This was concerning but I seemed to come right reasonably quickly. After the MRI it
was discovered, I had a severe blocked artery, and I was sent to a vascular surgeon in
Whangarei for a chat which resulted in not much except being told to take aspirin until
I was 70 and that they would probably look at doing something then. Also, around this
time it was discovered that Serena's mum was unwell, so we ended up going back to
Whangarei to support her.
We had also started the process of getting our property on the market and sold after
borrowing from Serena's uncle what we needed to subdivide the property. Perhaps if
we had managed to get it done a long time ago, we wouldn’t have traveled or ever left
but it’s hard to say for sure which was the better outcome long term. We certainly didn’t
want to go back to the house now, besides, we still had to pay back the cost of the
subdivision and truck loan, so we didn’t have a lot of options.
71

Roaming home

It was then discovered; Serena’s mum had a brain tumor and so we tried to support her
as best we could whilst managing our own issues. It was almost 5 months later before
all the council work was done and we had someone interested in buying our property.
We managed to park the truck down the road from our property at a friend’s place.
Gloria had sailed to New Zealand from America with her husband Chuck and although
I never really got to know chuck before he died, we did find a great friend in his wife
Gloria Bruni. Many a time I would bring up the topic of boats and sailing with her and
about the prospect of buying a large boat and many times she has pointed out the folly
of such an idea. I don’t blame her feeling that way as it’s a hard life and not everyone
wants to be thrown across the room by a rogue wave or feeling like, if you throw up
one more time you’re going to die. But the 6 weeks we stayed with this amazing woman
and whilst writing this book there, I would still scour the internet looking at sailboat
pictures and watching many hours of YouTube videos about sailing adventures. When
Serena and I got rid of our old Heartly Trailor sailor, I asked her if we were finished
with sailing. We really did seem to have had our fill of it after only a few trips to the
poor knight’s islands and much time spent fixing the thing and the scales seemed to be
tipped more on the side of fixing rather than enjoying.
We had even brought, with the help of Serena's mum an old colin child’s 24ft keeler as
a project boat that we thought we might resell and make some money on, but after a
storm tore it from its moorings and destroyed it, we gave up on the idea and our
boating days were done. So perhaps it was just a fancy that kept me somewhat
interested. At least it filled in the time until the funds came through from the house sale
and we could travel again. Eventually it did and we were able to pay off all our debts
and the mortgage for Serena's parent’s property as well. But what was left ended any
thought of buying land or a boat. Eventually we had caught up on the truck
maintenance and all the tidying up with house selling and we departed for the second
time in our new truck for the south. We thought this time we would head down the
west coast again for a change of scenery.

72

PANDEMIC

Then we heard about a virus from Wuhan. Where is that anyway? We didn’t think too
much about it as after all were all the way down in New Zealand. But it seemed that
governments were starting to worry even if we weren’t.
By this time our friend Phillip had gone with the gypsy fair group to the South Island so
we thought we would make a push for there too since we could do no more for anyone
in Whangarei and I was happy to be away again. As we traveled, their seemed to be
more and more people talking about this virus called Covid 19. It was almost palpable
in the air as we traveled. People were talking about closing the borders. This was
worrisome as I thought that they might even stop the Ferries across the cook strait, at
least for passengers. We didn’t want to get stuck in the north for any of the events that
seemed to be brewing on the horizon so we decided we would just go straight to
73

Roaming home

wellington. It took us about a week to get down to the ferry terminal. This time
Suzannah had no illusions of what a ferry was. The pandemic media were sounding
alarms from the government and the WHO and everyone was being advised to take
precautions. Suzannah was way ahead of everyone and began wearing gardening gloves
just in case. For the rest of us we just tried to live like it was going to be over quick and
hopefully things would go back to normal, but I had a feeling that it wouldn’t for a long
time, if ever.
We arrived in Picton and drove straight to Koromiko, where we had stayed on our
previous trip. Sadly, Les had passed away. But Christine was still the custodian and we
got to meet his son and daughter in law who were also very welcoming and friendly. We
stayed a few days and then left to catch up with Phillip, Cindy and kids as our kids also
really wanted to see them again. We were barely there a week when it was announced
that the country was going into lock-down.
The surreal had suddenly become very real and I didn’t like it one bit. It was decided
that we would return to Koromiko for the period of 3 weeks lockdown as I felt that this
would be the best environment for our family. Phillip decided on staying with a friend
in Oxford and although we wanted to go there too, Serena and I felt strongly that we
should part ways for a while.
We got to see some terrified NZMCA club people flocking to the place we were
parked, as they waited for the last few sailings to get home to the north island or to
come back south from the north island as all the NZMCA parks had closed and they
were told to leave. Everyone wanted to be somewhere familiar, with family and friends
during lock-down. We just wanted to be free. I ended up going to hospital again a week
later with an angina attack brought on by stress. I was feeling so low and the thought of
getting a yacht resurfaced as I spent the hours in bed looking at sailing videos to pass
the time. We met a nice elderly couple during our time there named Jan and Darryl who
probably kept me sane as I paced the big paddock where we were parked and walked
the long road that led to the highway.

74

Roaming home

Jan enjoying a morning ride up and down the road

75

Roaming home

Morning routine for us were the kids playing while we walked up and down the road for
exercise.
The landowners brought over toys, bikes and whatever they thought might entertain
our kids. They even found an old dog kennel for Charlie to sleep in which he seemed
insulted by. I thought we might have been able to do some fishing during lockdown so
I had brought new rods and even a new camera lens so I could do close ups of wildlife.
But no. We were stuck in lock-down prison, except for the times we needed to go to
the dump station to empty the toilet, grey water and get more fresh water and groceries.
At the supermarket, people stood in line wearing masks the government said we should
wear, but didn’t provide, so we stood in line with scarves and t-shirts. We got bucket
loads of sanitizer as the weeks wore on and did our washing when we had to. The
streets were mostly deserted, and people barely spoke. We were all afraid of each other.
We tried to get things from the supermarket to entertain the kids, but they didn’t have a
lot. I had brought new batteries for the truck in the north island before crossing on the
76

Roaming home

ferry so I figured I might as well install them and a new solar panel, as we could at least
order things online to be delivered. I also spotted a cheap but good inverter in Motueka.
Should I risk the trip there to get it or would I be stopped somewhere along the road
and told to go back into isolation. I couldn’t not do it. I was like a bear in a cage, and I
needed to get some air. I jumped in the car half expecting to get stopped but there was
nothing. No road blocks, no fences or red tape. I drove through Nelson and people
were out riding bikes and the sun was shining. Obviously, the lock-down wasn’t being
enforced as rigorously as it was being reported. When I came back, I told Serena and we
thought about leaving and meeting up with Phillip again. But it was decided that I
would have to be patient a little longer, so I installed the batteries and the new inverter
instead. Eventually the call for freedom came and we decided we would leave as soon as
we were packed up. We had made some good friends in Koromiko and I’m sure as far
as prison camps go ours was probably the nicest, so it was a little sad to leave them.
We drove to Oxford and caught up with our friends who had not faired quite so well
during the lock-down, and we stayed with them for only a short time before deciding it
was time to do some traveling again. We decided that since it was winter now perhaps,
we would go find some mountain snow and we headed to Lake Teakapo. We parked in
a freedom camping spot for a night about 10 minutes outside the town as we thought
we would just take the car there rather than the truck.
And while we were standing around waiting for fish and chips it started snowing. It was
surreal all over again but now in a good way. We went back to the truck and settled in
for a cold night as it got dark. The morning was a glorious display of nature and excited
children.

77

Roaming home

Lake Tekapo

78

Roaming home

Snowball fun

79

Roaming home

Even the dog couldn’t resist.

80

Roaming home

After we tired of the cold, we headed back down towards Ashburton and then further
on to Dunedin. Over the next few days, health wise I felt like I was recovering slightly
but I noticed I was a lot slower moving than I had been. Everything took a bit more
effort, but I felt better. Then just before we climbed down into Dunedin, we blew
another tire. Replacing them was something I had intended to do as they were old just
like the ones on our first truck. But with all the pandemic and lock-down stuff I had
forgotten about it.
We managed to find someone to change it, but we had to take the truck to them, as it
was another rear tyre on a dual wheel axle. We could still drive it, so we gradually pulled
into traffic and made our way to the tyre shop on the other side of Dunedin. Serena’s
phone was flat, so I used google maps to navigate and relayed to Serena over the CB
when to turn. Unfortunately, google maps sent us up one of the steepest streets in
Dunedin. Serena didn’t stall the truck though and eventually made it through all the
intersections, turning slowly so the truck didn’t lean too hard on the flat tyre side. We
were both relieved to get there.
81

Roaming home

We had already traveled a quite a way that day, so we were kind of ready to stop. We
ended up getting takeout again that night once we got two new retreads fitted it was
late. Then we drove to Mosgiel as it seemed like the best option to get out of the city
and find some place quiet to park for the night. We eventually found a spot just on the
outskirts and wearily went to sleep. In the morning we found out through a stranger
that we could park at the showgrounds in Mosgiel for $10 a night or $15 if we needed
power.
We had about $20,000 left in the bank, so it wasn’t too much of a drain on our finances,
but we did need to look at what we were going to do long term. We could keep
spending the money we had traveling, or we could see if there was a snowballs chance
that we might be able to find some cheap land somewhere.
While we were parked there, I went for a drive one day and saw a sign saying Trees of
the World. It seemed an interesting place, so I drove into what ended up being a tree
business that sold, planted and removed full sized trees and had bonsai trees to boot. I
walked around for a while looking at trees and one of the workers came out and we got
chatting about the bonsai trees. I told him about my wife’s love of them and suggested
they might like to give her some work if anything was available. I left my number and
then went back to the truck and told Serena about the amazing tree place. The next day
I took her along to have a look and it happened that the owner was there, and the
worker, who happened to also be his son in law, had passed on the offer of
employment which he seemed quite happy to supply. A couple of days later my wife
had some work again, this time in an area she really enjoyed working in.
But I had nothing to do but look after the kids during the day, help them with home
schooling when needed and just chatted to people. One day I thought that perhaps we
should just invest what we had left in the bank getting the truck setup better.
We discussed it and figured that the likelihood of getting a bit of land with what we had
left was remote so why not. So, I worked out some things we wanted to do. We got a
Gas Fitter to replace all the gas pipes with copper so we could get the gas certified, then
we re-did the plumbing, then got a new stove, replaced all the solar panels with higher
wattage ones and re did the bathroom so it had actual lining on the walls and not
fiberglass roofing sheets which was all we had at the time of the build.
82

Roaming home

A man in a bus parked a few rows down loaned me his trestles and we set to work
measuring and cutting sheets of wall board. It was loud and messy work, and I could
only do it around lunchtime as it took a long time for the temperature to rise and the ice
to melt on everything. I managed to upset one lady parked next to us that did not like
me cutting the shower lining sheets. We tried not to do anything before 10 am and
usually the trucks driving past, and planes overhead were already making their own
noises, so I didn’t see a problem, but I think some people just expect that everyone
around them has retired just because they had.
We stayed in Mosgiel for about 2 months before we decided to venture back north. We
thought we would get some work done on the truck first to get a new COF before we
Left. Mostly just cleaning up the chassis and oil and filter change. The COF passed but
they noted on the sheet that the truck was developing chassis heave. It was the same
amount when we bought it. It developed a flat tyre too but they didn't seem to think
that needed putting on the sheet. But there is no arguing with these people. We left our
friendly pigeon park which the kids loved to visit.

83

Roaming home

We climbed the steep hill out of Dunedin and we were off again heading north.
Everything was going so well till just before Ashburton when we noticed steam coming
from under the truck and since it didn't run on steam, we thought it best to stop.
What now? I had a look under the truck but I couldn't see where the water was coming
from or anything. It meant right there on the side of the road we would have to pull
everything out of the cab and lift the floor and tilt the cab.

We called the AA to come and help should we need a tow or something but when we
finally got the cab up, I saw the radiator cap had blown off and was just sitting on top
of the radiator. I'm not sure if the guy who was working on the truck didn't put it in
properly or what but it didn't work very well sitting there. I made a few adjustments to
the cap and screwed it on again but we needed to check if that was the only thing that
had caused it or if it was something else. The AA guy brought some water and we
84

Roaming home

refilled the radiator and found a mechanic in Ashburton to take it to. It was already
getting late so we had no choice but to book a motel for the night and leave the truck
with the mechanic. We found a dog friendly motel and the kids liked the idea of a night
away from home. The next day we found out that the truck was ok, no damage done
and a new radiator cap fitted. What a relief.
We took the back-road way to Oxford since we had already detoured from the main
route and it wasn't long before we were parked at the reserve again just outside of town.
We were finding the Pandemic situation still had lasting effects on everything from
shopping to traveling, and we were beginning to weary of it all. The tiny town of
Oxford was still keeping up with the narrative of Simon said and we were just tired of it
all. What we really felt we needed to do now was just stop traveling for a while and be
in some out-of-the-way place to ride the whole thing out. So, we prayed and by faith
we started looking in earnest at cheap pieces of land that we could buy. We had only
$10,000 left in the bank, but as crazy as it was, we believed somehow, we were to buy
land.
We were part of a savings pool group at the time, and we thought we would approach
them for a loan to purchase a property that we both liked in a place called Maruia on
the west coast. How it works is that you don’t pay interest on loans, but have to pay
into it the same amount you borrow, for the same amount of time, sometimes longer,
so others can borrow your money just as you borrowed theirs. It’s built around trust so
usually you have to be voted into it by one or more members. The amount we needed
to borrow was a big loan for the pool to lend and we were really surprised when they
voted yes to a loan for $70 thousand dollars.
Not long before we went to have a look at the property, a couple pulled up next to us
and began cooking their lunch, I went over and said hi to them and noticed that they
only had one solar panel on their roof. I had spare ones since I had replaced all mine
and I offered them the panel for free if they could use it. They were happy to have it. It
was then we asked where they came from, and they said Maruia. So of course, we
discussed the piece of land we had found and were thinking about purchasing.
They told us all the things we needed to know about the area and the people that lived
there and the small country school that consisted of only 14 kids. It was another one of
85

Roaming home

those meetings that was just meant to be. We decided when we went to Maruia we
would meet the principal of the school as well, just in case our kids felt like they would
like to have some school time with other kids.

I was not surprised that this was all transpiring because it’s very much how we are led
through life’s journey as we travel. When we saw the land, we both felt like it was ok
and felt like a great place to just rest from all the craziness that was going on in the
country. It wasn’t that we fell in love with the place. It just felt right at the time. When
we finally purchased it and moved onto it, we had a beautiful welcoming gift that
arrived on my birthday in September. We had been hoping to see snow and were told
that sometimes Maruia gets a good dusting.

Maruia

To me it felt like God was saying “happy birthday.” We even got to use the neighbor’s
tractor to move some dirt around so we could have a nice flat platform for the truck.
Almost immediately we started to settle in. I started landscaping, the kids started going
86

Roaming home

to school and Serena started planting and setting up her bonsai trees as soon as the
snow began to melt, and the weather got a little warmer. The kids had to get used to
structure again with their new school and adjust to other young people. It wasn’t the
easiest community to connect with as we were considered “blow-ins,” that stayed for a
while and left, whilst people who lived there were typically 3rd generation.
This was frustrating for us because we got so used to making quick acquaintances on
our travels as you never knew if you would see someone again or not, so you got to be
friends quickly. But in Maruia the locals did not see the worth or perhaps the need of
getting to know people who would likely not stay. That was disappointing. Still, they
have the right to be how they want to be, and we soon adjusted our expectations to it
when we realized we would be kept on the fringes. We did however become friendly
with the lady we brought our property off as she had her house up on a hill behind us
which she wanted to use as an Air B ‘n’ B, but needed help to get it off the ground. We
decided that we would help her get some work done on her place as a good-will gesture
as well as working on our place to get it more useful to our needs.
This involved also building accommodation in one of the bays in our barn. The lovely
people we had met in Koromiko came to visit us one day before Christmas and we told
them what we were hoping to do but didn’t have the money. So, they had a think about
it and rang us out of the blue one day. They said to write a list of all the materials we
would need, which we did, and they gifted us pretty much everything on the list from
framing timber to roofing sheets, screws, nails and even a freezer.
Our first year in Maruia was so blessed and we found out the name of the place meant
sheltered and we really felt like we had entered a valley that was protected from the
outside world. For the most part I was kind of at peace, but I was not happy. It’s hard
to explain but I felt incredibly unfulfilled. I asked Serena one day if she was happy here.
She said she was, and I told her I was happy for her but I felt miserable. Like there was
no part of me that wanted to do homesteading again. When I looked in my heart all I
wanted to do was buy a boat. This is crazy I know, and I have had so many people tell
me so. I have prayed and prayed to get rid of the feeling and just put my own desires
aside for the good of the family, but time and time again it would keep coming back.
Serena was busy developing the land and planting gardens and Elizabeth wanted a
87

Roaming home

greenhouse, as did we, because the frost was late in the season, and it wasn’t safe to
plant anything till it really warmed up. So, I built a large greenhouse for us and a small
one for Elizabeth, and cleared an area for Serena to have her Bonsai trees.
Then I had the bright idea I would get some rabbits. I’m not sure why really, but the
kids talked about them from time to time and Serena used to run a meat rabbit business
when she was young. So, I saw an ad on the web for rabbits for free, and arranged to go
and collect them from an address in Christchurch. I couldn’t believe my good fortune.
They had 15 of them, all free. I took the lot and gave Serena the job of building
something to put them in when I got back. This ended up being the crate from the
trailer with a partition in between to try and separate the different families. It was a sea
of fur when we got them all together and what started as a small number soon turned
into a large number. And I started to realize why they were free.
I tried to get the kids interested in setting up a small rabbit business, but I think they
were more interested in getting different colors because the population just exploded
until we ended up with over 100 of the cute little creatures and it was costing $260 a
month in food. Now I understand where the term breed like rabbits came from.

88

Roaming home

Then one afternoon we decided to help our neighbor move a large shed from around
the front of their house to the back of their house using poles to roll it on. I have
always been strong when it came to lifting things, but I think I over-did it a bit and I
retired to bed early feeling exhausted. When I woke up from a nap, I felt sick and dizzy.
When I opened my eyes, it was worse. I sat up and everything was spinning. I managed
to get downstairs and sat on the bottom step. Serena looked at me and called the
ambulance. I’d had another stroke.
It could have been anywhere else on the road or in some out-of-the-way freedom
camping spot, but it was here. It meant that Serena didn’t have the headache of trying
to manage things, move vehicles and have no way of looking after the kids. We had a
stable place and I got to have a 3-hour ambulance ride while she could stay with the
kids. It is very disconcerting when you awake from a nap and everywhere you look the
world is spinning in circles. I couldn’t even walk in a straight line and one eye went left
and one eye stayed put. I thought that this might be the end for me and that Serena
89

Roaming home

would live alone in a place we just moved to, with no friends and no real support. When
I got out of hospital a few days later, I would sit in the barn on an old chair and watch
tv, frustrated by my lack of ability to do things, or even get words out that I wanted to
say, while sand flies evaded my efforts to chase them away. I felt useless.
But eventually things improved, and I started to be able to do things again. Then one
day we visited a couple we had met further down the road towards Lewis pass, who was
trying to move a big water tank. I helped too and the next day I had another turn and
was back in hospital. It wasn’t as bad this time though, but it left me feeling incredibly
tired afterwards. Serena would come to Nelson and drive me home again after a night
in Hospital. We liked Nelson but Richmond was our favorite place as it had the art
supply store that Serena loved to visit. Once when we were going here, we had seen this
lovely white van at a car sales place, and I felt like I needed to go and inquire about it.
Serena noticed it too but when we left town, we forgot about it. The next time we
passed by we both saw it again and thought that we needed to inquire about it but again
we didn’t.

I was starting to feel so warn out now and the feeling I had about Maruia had started to
weigh heavy on me. It was a lovely place, but I just couldn’t see myself staying much
longer and I started to see only the potential of selling it or staying there to die. I was
depressed and felt despairing of much of anything. So much work still needed to be
done and I was too tired to do much digging anymore and Serena would always tell me
off if she saw me digging anyway.
Then we saw a small digger being advertised on trade-me for $13,000. We had nothing
of course, so it was another loan request through to the savings pool and again they
voted yes, so we went shopping for a digger a few weeks later. Through an agent we
found a second hand one in Murchison, so we brought it and towed it home on our
trailer. I loved it. It was like a kind of mental therapy for me and using the leavers
helped me regain some mental coordination as I worked them. First, I improved the
driveway and made it into a turn around. Then I dug a huge pond and then a large
parking area in the paddock.
It took about 4 months to complete and then I felt it was done. I had no use for it
90

Roaming home

anymore. 3 weeks later it was sold, and I missed it a lot. Six months later I was back in
hospital but this time with a rapid heartbeat. I was getting tired of all the hospital visits.
I thought about that a bit after the second stroke when my vision went haywire. It was
so nauseating that I thought I didn’t want to continue to live with that condition.
So, this time as I lay there in the hospital, despairing again and I wondered what the
point of it is when now I can’t even take care of my family. I thought about dying and I
felt afraid not because I would be dead but that I might still live on in a spiritual form
and be like a wisp or spirit with no understanding of this new realm I would inhabit.
Just like a baby that comes into this world I would be helpless. I would have no control
over my environment and what I wanted would be of no consequence. I was plain
scared. Then, as I lay there this quiet voice gave me a great peace. It simply said “I will
take care of you.” This was kind of hard for me to hear because I always made stuff
happen and I liked being in control of things. But now, I had to realize that I was no
longer in control of anything and I couldn’t just walk away from it.
The next morning when I left the hospital, I had a 3 hour wait for Serena to come get
me again from nelson Hospital. I kept feeling like we should go and see the van we
were thinking about before we left Nelson. I still had no idea why, but it seemed
important to do it so when Serena arrived, we both went to have a look.
We took it for a test drive, and I thought it was a bit low geared and although it looked
nice, I didn’t think much of it and even looked at the one beside it which I thought
might be a bit cheaper. But I kept coming back to the white one. So, we asked the price.
$43,000.
Wow how were we going to afford that? Well, we didn’t know but decided to apply for
finance in faith and then left to wait out the result. We could have approached the
savings pool but I think the pool was a bit low on funds at that point. We didn’t think
we were ever going to get approved for such an expensive vehicle but as we waited at a
nearby park for the kids to have a play, the voice was back. “I’m giving you the van.”
Now I know it’s not good to hear voices per say, and strait jackets aside, it was the same
voice that spoke to me all those years ago that calmed my thoughts about feeding my
kids when we traveled. It has always been reliable, so I listened and accepted it. An hour
later we were told we were approved. Now we were the proud owners of a van and I
91

Roaming home

had no idea why.
Later as I began to reason it all through, I figured that we needed the extra seats for the
kids and we now had too much stuff to cart around if we left Maruia, which was
looking more and more likely. Serena had gotten some farm work while I was
convalescing and she was so tired at the end of the day that she doggedly dragged
herself around looking after all the plants, the kids and sometimes me as well. I said to
her one day, “Serena, we need to leave here. I can’t watch you do this anymore.” I felt
that she was supposed to paint as she loves it, and now, she only works. She didn’t like
the idea very much to start with as she had invested so much energy in the place, but
she did come to see and came to terms with the fact that she was tired too and was
missing her art and writing.
But we still needed to pay the bills, so she kept milking cows until the end of the
season, but we started to cut down on what we did on the property. A little while later I
was thinking about the fact that we had been towing a trailer for over three years and
although it had carted all serenas trees around the country, I felt it was time to sell it. I
had no idea what we would do with all the trees, but Serena now had so many we would
never have been able to take them with us anyway. She spoke with a friend she had met
online who was selling bonsai in Christchurch and she offered to look after and sell
them for us while we traveled. I was relieved as I didn’t want Serena to lose them.
So, we spent a lot of time carting trees to Christchurch until there were just a few
remaining ones that she couldn’t to let go of. Around this time, I saw an ad for a
Caravan in Nelson. I asked Serena’s uncle if he could buy it for us against the property
when it sold, and he agreed. We went and got it, and it became our new covered in
trailer, not only for the trees but also for all the things we had accumulated, as happens
when you own some land. Things were falling more and more into place.
After a while we listed the property and got ready to leave. The day came and once
again we put our backs to the land and set our sails to the wind. We decided to go to
Oxford and visit some friends first, with the intention of heading further south
afterwards. But as time went by, we felt that the way forward was not south for us but
to return to the north island. This was not my idea of where I really wanted to go.
All the congestion, noise, and people. But we had a talk about it with the kids and
92

Roaming home

everyone said they felt we needed to go north. So, I booked the tickets and we had 4
weeks to get ready for our road trip north. We were now towing a caravan with the van,
and we had sold our faithful kia car so that we had enough money for the trip. It was
sad saying goodbye to such a good car, but we were always having to move on from
things and sometimes people and put them behind us.
four weeks later our friends in oxford pulled us from their sodden paddocks with their
tractor for the journey north. It was sad saying goodbye to more friends but that’s the
way of a traveling life. We only journey with people for a brief while and then it’s over
until next time. We stay in contact with them via Facebook or messenger and other
apps as we travel, and this helps keep the connections going as we travel. I think the
kids have a harder time with good-byes than us adults as we already know what life is
like in this regard. Children still have a sense of permanence or at least a desire to
maintain the familiar. But as time has gone by even our kids get the idea that you can
say goodbye to friends and then pick up again from where you left off when we return.

93

Roaming home

Parked at the Van Beek’s Property in Oxford

94

Roaming home

We had planned to take a few days to get to Picton, so we stayed a night in Kaikoura
and explored a little of this coastal town.

Kaikoura

The coastline is rugged and rocky with new land that appeared in the last earthquake.

95

Roaming home

The seals spend hours basking in the sun upon warmed rocks about Kaikoura and it is so
tempting to walk right up to them and pat them. This was something I had to warn our
eager Suzy about as they have been known to bite. Early the next morning we were on
our way again heading north and it was decided that we would just change the ferry
bookings again and catch the late-night boat to wellington, with the idea of sleeping in a
cabin overnight.

96

Roaming home

THE LAST RETURN

Another crossing

What do they say about making plans? The crossing turned out to be a little rough. Not
as rough as they have been in the past but enough so that during the crossing, whilst me
and Serena were trying to get to sleep, the kids would leap in the air as the ship
descended into a trough between waves, making them briefly air-bourn. It was kind of
comical in a way because they complained of being seasick, but they still couldn’t resist
the fun.
To them life still has a lot of adventure to offer. For me, some of the adventure has left.
Perhaps due to the strokes and the sobering thoughts of our impermanence or
pandemics and life’s responsibilities. We arrived in Wellington and rather than staying in
the city, tired as we were, we decided to push on to Masterton. We found where we
could park near a large lake where we found other truck and bus people parked. You
97

Roaming home

could almost say it was discretionary parking for the homeless and the weary, allowed
by the council. In the morning I spoke to a few of the other people parked there to
check on the freedom camping rules and thankful that we wouldn’t be required to move
on again straight away.

Freedom camping Masterton

We spent a couple of days exploring around the lake and basically just trying to unwind
from the crossing before we moved off again.
Every place has people with hard luck stories, and for many it’s the main reason they
travel. I wish that weren’t the case, but perhaps that’s what drives most of us through
life and causes us to make the changes that we do. Certainly, it isn’t contentment that
drives us and yet people find their own kind of happiness in a simpler life.

I find it’s usually men who end up here the most, though occasionally I see a woman or
two who have come upon hard times. Most seem happy to have the presence of
children around them and they become almost surrogate grandparents. I know stranger
danger is quite on the foremost in people’s minds as far as strangers are concerned but
98

Roaming home

Serena and I usually make first introductions with people and quickly gauge where
people are at before we allow them some entry into our family life. We kind of adopt
people so to speak.
The wildlife around the lake mostly consists of bird life and boy, can they poop. But
they also make great models for photography.

99

Roaming home

Eventually we discover that Masterton doesn’t have its own dump station but uses the
facilities of a local campground and getting water is not as easy either, so we decide to
move on after a few days. We say goodbye to yet more acquaintances with an exchange
of phone numbers and continue on our way.
After a while the driving gets a little easier and we begin to fall back into the rhythm of
traveling. It’s not a comfortable rhythm as it’s always a rhythm of packing and
unpacking. Hurried preparations for dinner whilst the kids go off exploring and
somewhere in between there is the online learning that we need to make time for.
Making sure the cats, dog and rabbits are being fed or walked, as the case may be.
The next place we have to go to is Dannevirke. This is because we had promised to
pick up a couple of extra rabbits to transport for Serena's brother in Whangarei. We
were already traveling with three rabbits. Two we kept in special lockers, and one was
kept in a cage in the caravan. But one more needed collecting. We found the place
without too much bother and we were soon on our way again. Just outside Dannevirke
we stopped in a pull-over spot for some lunch before continuing. Then I had a feeling
like I needed to fill the fuel tank on the truck. I called Serena on the radio to ask her
what the gauge said, and she thought we had enough till the next town, so we left it at
that and carried on. I still had an uneasy feeling about the fuel situation but if the gauge
said we had half a tank left then that was fine. So, I was pretty surprised and frustrated
when we ran out of diesel only 2 km from a gas station in Napier, on a busy motorway.
Oh, why don’t I listen to those promptings more often?
I knew there was little point trying to bleed the injectors on the truck, even after I got
some more diesel for the tank. The only really good way to do it, I have found is by
opening the diesel lines and for that I needed to lift the cab. Although we have done
this before on the side of the road, it wasn’t at night on a busy motorway. I went back
to the van and just said, “what do I do?” I got the answer, though unwelcome, almost
immediately. “Tow truck.” We had no insurance, so I already knew this was going to be
expensive. $450 to be precise to be towed 2 km to the garage. I went on ahead of the
tow truck and asked the attendant at the garage if we could park the truck on the
forecourt overnight, while I work on it. He thought it would be ok, so we got the tow
truck to drop the truck off there. But as these things seem to go, we ended up with a
further complication.
100

Roaming home

Somehow the tow driver managed to dent the corner of the Luton with a piece of steel
that protruded from his truck and to top it off when he got us parked, the left rear tyre
went flat because he managed to drive over a bolt at the back of the garage. We worked
until 4 am unloading the whole front section of the truck, which included all the
firewood stored behind the seats in the cab so we could lift the cab up.

101

Roaming home

It must have looked quite a sight to onlookers I’m sure, who were still up and about at
that time in the morning. Some quite drunk, and yet still managing a reasonable
conversation despite the obvious handicap. Thankfully, we managed to get the kids
settled to sleep around midnight so we could work without too much distraction, but it
was exhausting work nevertheless. When it was done, I gratefully rolled into bed and
fell asleep despite the fact we had cars coming in for gas all night.

102

Roaming home

About 4 hours later I woke up to my alarm and went and had a look at the tyre. I
couldn’t see anything major and the thought of changing it for the spare was more than
I was up to. When everyone was awake, I drove the truck slowly to the air hose and put
some air in the tyre. It seemed to be working and didn’t deflate too quickly. I checked
the distance to the NZMCA park and figured it only had to stay inflated for 10 minutes.
I got everyone ready to go as soon as the tyre was full, and off we went as fast as we
could. By the time we got to the parking place the tyre still had a small amount of air in
it but was still going down. I crawled back into bed and fell asleep. I was so tired. When
I woke up again, I had a raging fever, sweats and burning throat.
This was all I needed. Serena was feeling as bad as I was, and we checked ourselves with
the rapid covid test kits we were given by the principle at the Maruia school. Negative
test but we still felt terrible. The kids were also coming down with it, so the next day
was one of doing the absolute minimum and trying to get as much sleep as possible. On
103

Roaming home

the third day I had to organize someone to come and fix our tyre and I had to get to a
dump station to empty the grey water tank and get fresh water. Thankfully my sister
loaned us the money to fix the tyre and the following day when it was done, I started
the truck up and drove 4 sickies in the back to empty the grey tank. I’m not sure how I
managed it, but I did and when I parked us all again, I promptly fell asleep.
This week was rough. We didn’t have too much trouble here apart from an NZMCA
custodian complaining that our cat had gone to the loo amongst the bushes and that
they would need to be on a lead. I think anyone with a cat knows what they think of
that idea.
After a few days we started to recover from what ever had brought us all down and we
were able to travel again. We thought we would only do an hour’s drive a day. But
freedom camping spots for our truck, van and a caravan were hard to find so we ended
up driving all the way to Taupo.
We thought we would park near the lake in the freedom camping spot there but when
we arrived it had been closed for a Maori Rahui. We went across the road to the
NZMCA park instead. While I was away getting supplies with two of the kids, and
Serena was taking the dog into the dog park 30m away, an NZMCA custodian gave our
12-year-old daughter grief about our caravan not being registered with the NZMCA and
left her in tears. They didn’t approach Serena or wait while Serena tried to rush back to
speak to them, they hurried around the back of our truck and disappeared. Serena was
furious that they had a go at our daughter instead of speaking to an adult.
We were unable to find the person anywhere to discuss the matter, so we packed up
and carried on with our journey, finally stopping for the night in Tokoroa by the lake.
This lake was a man made one for the people of Tokoroa and enjoyed by the youth to
much effect during the summer months. It was a good opportunity to get some
washing done whilst the kids enjoyed a little play time as they were beginning to recover
enough from our bout of sickness.

104

Roaming home

The following day we all enjoyed some rest time as we walked around the lake. Of
course, the cats came, as well as the dog and I’m sure we looked quite the sight to the
locals. After lunch we prepared for our journey north again and the cats had been safely
stowed in their travel cages. We were lucky and managed to get through Auckland
rather quickly and emerged at the other side within a couple of hours and parked the
truck once again at Hatfield’s beach reserve.
I often refer to it as the place we sailed the Duck, a little dinghy we had brought with
the idea of sailing it with the kids as we traveled to different areas but after a trial run at
Hatfield’s where we almost sunk it due to my weight, we decided it just wasn’t big
enough for us and anything bigger would be problematic to try and fit into the trailer
we were towing at the time.
The next morning, we drove to Mangawhai and had lunch with my sister’s family
before driving through to Whangarei. The thought was to stay at Serena's parents place,
but the ground was so wet that we only visited and then drove to Whananaki south
beach. Finally, we had a chance to rest. Serena's brother’s family lived close by, so we
105

Roaming home

had access to water and toilet disposal. All we needed to do now was stop for a while.

Whananaki south beach
Each day I wake up and I go down the beach and stare at the ocean. I think about the
journey, some good and some bad. It’s not much different to everyday life after all. As
I look back, I feel grateful for the experiences we have had. We change as we grow.
Who knows what kind of adventure is around the next bend?

106

Roaming home

“Thoughts”
We each have this one short life to live, and we each carry our burdens with us, be it
health, financial, emotional, or mental. No one is ever truly prepared for a loved one’s
departure and we are doubtfully prepared for our own. I am sure it has been a surprise
for many who have had their time and gone. One minute a vibrant member of a
community, a friend, a lover but then just like that it is finished. We only have our
memories and experiences left then. The things most precious to us when we are
nearing our own ends. We should fill our baskets with as many of these fragrant flowers
as we can, discarding the weeds of life that choke us.
We got to meet so many people, who you might not think worth getting to know from
the outside, and yet their lives are rich and their hearts large despite the hardships that
they must live with every day My own pride and snobbery were also challenged during
the course of this journey and though sometimes it’s been difficult, I’m glad of it.
It has been 8 years since we left Whangarei and began this journey of external as well as
internal discovery. What started out as the reluctant journey of a family trying to find its
purpose and place as we traveled around New Zealand in a home-built truck, turned
into an adventure of a lifetime. When I think of what we lost compared to what we
gained in the experience I think the choice was a good one.

‘Some people are so poor that all they have is money.’ Bob Marley

107

Roaming home

Their Story
Before writing this book, I put forward a simple questioner for people who have lived
this life for a time or who were just starting out, to fill out and share what it was that
started them on the journey. These are included here mostly as presented and the
opinions and views expressed are their own, just as the journey.

Questioner’s and submissions.

Kate Dunn
We bought our 9.8m motorhome already set up, although we made a lot of changes to it in the
first six weeks. It is a 1998 Nissan Condor truck, with an extended chassis to allow room for the
box on the back. The box (house) had been built in 2008 by the previous owners with professional
help. When we bought it, it had a queen bed in the back room, and two single beds over the cab.
With three kids, we wanted permanent beds for all, so we removed the queen from the back and
put it over the cab, and built pods/bunks in the back room.
We’ve had lots of issues with it because of its age. We figure, it’s a home and a vehicle, so you
have to expect to maintain both. We’ve replaced the oven/stove, fridge, water pump, and done a
lot of work on other things in both the house and the truck itself. We’ve added a window, a vent,
and lots of other smaller things, replaced curtains, vent covers, and various other small parts too.
We haven’t had much trouble getting the parts, except for the alternator, which we had to
replace with something else.
There were mixed responses to our leaving. Some people said they wished they could do
something like that. Some thought we were crazy and that it wouldn't be long before we were
back in a house. That made us all the more determined that it would work. It's all gone well for
us, and we've faced some difficult health issues while living in the motorhome. It's not all roses,
but then, neither is living in a house. And we get to live at the beach most days!

108

Roaming home

We have three older kids. When we moved into the truck, they were 15, 11.5, and 9. It’s three
years later now, so they are 18, 14.5, and 12. There have been difficult things – probably the lack
of space is the hardest. Our daughter used to be a bit embarrassed telling people she lived in a
motorhome but people were so positive about it that she now tells people with pride. But we are
all quite used to it now. It’s just normal life for us. And the positives have been great too – we live
at the beach most of the time! Our kids are now talking about getting their own motorhomes
when they leave home! They like the lifestyle.

Other than the three kids? Just my husband. He actually still works a lot, so we aren’t together as
much as we’d like. We are working towards getting him free of that. We all love being together.
We have home schooled our kids for years (well before we moved into the truck). So it wasn’t
that big of an adjustment in their education. It has definitely been the right decision for our kids.
We did school a bit for the older two, and it didn’t work at all. Our eldest was bullied badly and
our middle-had learning difficulties that the school didn’t even recognize. With the eldest, I did
things very much like school, but with the younger two I’ve relaxed a lot more. We probably do
an hour or two of schoolwork a day, at most. It’s just not necessary to do the five hours they
would do at school. There is so much mucking around and busywork at school that takes up time.
With the one-on-one attention, they can get it done much quicker. I love seeing them do their
schoolwork up a tree, or at the beach, or on the back of a horse, or wherever!
We travel a bit differently. While we live and move around full time, not staying in one location,
we are mostly based around one city. So, it’s probably not as hard as it is for some. But at the
same time, we actually really want to be free to drive away and not come back (unless we choose
to). We are working towards that. The 9 to 5 and the home ownership dream are not all they are
cracked up to be. I’d rather have experiences than stuff. Much rather be free to roam.
Some things have not been so great. Those with bad attitudes to freedom campers can be a bit of
a drag. And the fact that there are more and more rules about where you can and can’t park. And
emptying black tanks isn’t much fun! But other than that, we have few complaints.
Waking up to a new place every day is great. And when the view outside the window is the beach,
or the forest, or the mountains, that’s pretty amazing. We have made a lot of great friends with
other families on the road too. And less housework, and there are other people who mow my
lawns (read the gardener at the place we are parked!) – that, we love!
While my husband is working, we are also building up our business running online courses and
109

Roaming home

classes (mostly for home-schooled kids). My husband also tutors an online tertiary class. I’ve done
editing and proofreading for years, but gave it up recently. We started travelling because we
were renting a house in Auckland, and there was no way we could ever save a cent. We were
throwing our money away. Felt like we would never be able to retire or do any of the things we
wanted to do (read travel). So, we decided we had to do something about it, and this is what we
chose to do. We borrowed the money for the truck, so we could pay it off and then have lower
living costs.
We also wanted freedom. Still not quite there yet. But it is getting closer and closer. We have
always loved travelling. We did a big trip around the States and Canada in 2010-11, when our kids
were little – bought an RV and drove for eight months. We loved that! So, we knew we could live
like this. And hopefully soon we will be free to hit the road for good. A lot of people wait to travel
until their kids are gone. We want to do it with our kids. We want to show them the world. For
now, we go elsewhere as often as possible, which generally means we spend about three months
of the year travelling out of town. The rest of the time we are in the one city, but we move from
place to place. And we stay at the beach a lot, so that’s well on the way to freedom if you ask me!
If I had to do it again the only thing, I’d change is that I’d have done it sooner. I wish we’d done it
five years earlier than we did. We almost left it too late to enjoy it with our kids. And to be
honest, I want to do it in a sailboat! We left all our stuff behind. But that’s fine. We don’t need it!
We also left our huge amount of gardening and housework, and our paying into someone else’s
pocket! Nothing else we miss at all.

110

Roaming home

111

Roaming home

Phillip and Cindy James
We bought our first bus mostly complete then re-built a 1972 Bedford. It was set up for a couple
but we needed it to suit a family of four so we stripped it out and started again. A solid year of
building and it’s not quite finished yet, we have learnt that a bus build actually never ends, there
is always something to be working on.
Most of our friends and family were supportive, one family member was very unsupportive and
caused a lot of grief for us which has resulted in the loss of that relationship. We have 2 children
now 7 and 9, we have been travelling for over 4years with them so it is normal life for them now.
They have moments of loving the life and others of missing certain friends and family but overall,
we are really glad we get to spend so much time together as a family and to raise the kids in a life
learning style, experiencing a tone of things they wouldn’t have the opportunity to do if they
were living a ‘regular’ life. we have found that living in such proximity means there is no room to
hide, issues have to be dealt with to keep small space living pleasant, keeping in mind that we are
all on the same team is very important.
We practice Life learning with our children, we find this very easy as it just flows out of our
everyday lives. They astound us continually with the new things they learn and we wouldn’t
change anything about the way our children are being educated.
The first year in a bus is the hardest, Phil calls it the year of undoing, because all the things you
thought were expected of you and how you ‘should be living’ goes out the window. There is a lot
of challenging of your belief systems and just generally a totally new way of life to get used to. By
the second year we had a bit more of a system going that worked for us, a bigger bus certainly
helped!
Having to regularly visit dump stations is a down side of living on the road, we really take for
granted water and waste systems when living in a house, so when you are suddenly limited by
the size of your bus water tanks, water consumption becomes closely monitored. No long hot
showers happen in our bus but fortunately there are plenty of good public pools we can make use
of and their facilities.

112

Roaming home

The best thing about living on the road is hands down the people we have met, followed closely
by the beautiful places we have been able to stay. We have made lifelong friends with fellow
travelers and love that as we continue to travel, we have friends in almost every town.
For income we have done various contract jobs, (mostly online), over the years but recently
decided to try something different. We purchased a food cart and joined The Original Gypsy Fair
who travel the country for 8 months of the year. The idea of travelling was always something Phil
wanted to do, but we didn't seriously decide to do it until Phil became very stressed in his job and
it was beginning to take a toll on his health both mentally and physically. We knew at the time we
needed to make some drastic lifestyle changes.
If we had to do it over, we wouldn't change a thing. We have learnt so much along our journey
and we couldn't imagine ever going back to a 'normal' suburban life, we truly love this lifestyle.
We left pretty much everything we had; downsizing was hard initially but ended up being very
therapeutic. Learning to live and be happy with less was another great lesson we learnt. The
hardest part was leaving friends and family behind but we actually had a new found freedom not
being bound by a 9-5 job that we could actually spend more time with them if we choose to.

113

Roaming home

Fran intuitive
I have had two vehicles, I bought both ready-built. The first bus I got 20 years ago and my current
truck I’ve had for 16 years. My mother was very supportive of the idea and thought it was great!
My children are all grown up now so it’s just me and a feline. At first, I traveled very fast and had
to get used to slowing down a bit. One of the down sides is being crowded in by noisy people.
Also being judged a lot for my house truck. It gets a bit silly but I like being able to move when I
want to and living simply. Red skies, beaches, rivers, lakes; exploring nature is great.
I have a business I built up. I’m a digital nomad. But I worked at Fairs for 12 years while I slowly
grew it. I wanted to travel because I was sick of moving house and spending 30 hours a week
looking after my property. It took me a long time to make it sustainable. If I knew then what I
know now… lol. I moved away from friends and sometimes I miss having private space.

114

Roaming home

She Laird
We bought our bus already built, and put it on my house mortgage. We have made some
changes, new fire in, taken out the air-conditioning, replaced with an air vent. We changed
seating slightly to be more user friendly, changed lighting to led and added more. The bus had
been parked up at a beach for a long time before we bought it, (buses don’t like sitting), so has
needed a lot of work but feel we are getting on top of it. Glad we went big to start with but are
now getting to the point that we want to downsize to a slightly smaller, less weighty vehicle
Friends were supportive of this life for us, they knew that this is a life we would enjoy, but family
not so supportive. But I think that comes down to being worried about us that we are making a
mistake. They still don’t fully understand it but they can see that we are happy with our life.
Me and my partner have four adult children between us who left home many years ago. Two
sons 10 & 14 when we started, now 14 and 18. They are easy going kids so they adapted well.
Coming from a small town with lots of bullying, sadness, poverty, anger and despair, it has been
good for them to see other towns and meet other people, so they can find out that not all towns
and people are as like this.
Ross has been amazing as he is stepfather to my boys his children are all grown up so it’s like
doing it all over again for him. I know it hasn’t been easy… I take my hat off to him. Lucky, he
knows it’s a package deal. We do dumb stuff because we can and if it makes someone else happy
and smile then I’m happy. This has been good for our family. Our eldest is not always with us so
we bought a caravan as well so he always has a roof over his head – we switch between bus and
caravan.
Schooling amounts to Correspondence for the younger one and he has improved greatly over
being stuck in a corner in a classroom and he has learnt so much practical skills from Ross that he
wouldn’t have otherwise learnt. Older son is at services linked to a school as he wants to join the
army, so he isn’t always with us. The first couple of years required a lot of learning about each
other and how to live in a smaller space especially during winter. But we have had no regrets.
One of the difficult things… Body odors… In a confined area on a wet winters day when you are
low on water and gas. Teenagers have long legs and arms and they sometimes forget that this
space is everyone’s space.
People think we are bludgers because we “freedom camp and don’t pay for anything.” People
sometimes get impatient driving behind us as we are trying to conserve our brakes coming down
115

Roaming home

a steep hill and want us to pull over on a 50cent coin-size bit of gravel… That isn’t going to
happen!
Meeting people is one of the upsides, it’s great seeing more of our country and showing the boys
different perspectives on life. Getting out there and in some cases getting back to basics…. And
just how far can we stretch the food in our pantry… All part of the journey. For money we mind
Holiday Parks and find work where we can – if there is no money, we don’t move… COF time is
always very nail-biting
We chose this life. We swapped the kids for a campervan and we headed to the South Island For
a month.
On our way back we stopped at Bulls to make a cup of coffee… I said to Ross I am enjoying this so
much I don’t want to go back to our old life of working 6.5 days a week. We were working to live
and survive. I wanted my life back – the more money we earned the more we spent. I was
hopeful that if we earnt less, we could spend less, but also have more family time. As we all know
life and quality of life isn’t guaranteed.

I said to Ross, “how often would we use it?”
He said, “as often as we can…”
I said, “so if we got something really big, we could live in it?”
And he said “yes…”
So, we started looking for a home on wheels before we got back to our “house”. Ross wanted to
build one but me being impatient and not wanting to wait for the build to happen while working
full time, decided we would get one prebuilt. As a child one of the things, I wanted to do was to
be a “gypsy,” to have the freedom to go where I wanted to go, to be able to “escape”.
If you want it to happen you have the choices to make it happen. If we had to do it all over again,
we would in a heartbeat. But we also know we can’t do this life forever, and one day we will have
to return to the four walls and the picket fence. Stress, stroppy neighbors that think your business
is their business, lawn mowing, house maintenance, huge debt, bills… We still have bills but less
of them, sickness… We have been so much healthier. We are lucky as we have a container that
we use as a workshop on a piece of land that a friend owns.

116

Roaming home

Sharon and Fred Sinclair
We sold our house and all contents, except what we needed in the MH, including 3 cars and a jet
boat. Gave the kids any sentimental stuff. We bought the bus as very basic in 2003. Bus had
lounge and kitchen altered to suit over the years. We have a 1970 Bedford VAM. Since having it
the main issue was brakes for COFs but as the years have passed, I think we have renewed most
of the running gear except the Isuzu motor. Fred does most of our own mechanical work and fits
in wiring for the motor, lights, radios etc. and does any interior repairs when needed i.e., wall
linings and cabinets. I did the rest, like sewing curtains and carpeting over our lovely varnished
floors to add warmth. We source parts at truck part shops or through word of mouth from other
Motor homers.
We have travelled every main road in NZ and a few back roads. Stayed at DOC camps, motor
camps, Freedom camped, stayed at POPs, on friend’s drives, CAPs etc. For heating we had a Little
Cracker fire put in and Fred installed a diesel heater recently. We have worked at orchards,
cleaned for education board, camp caretaking, as security and locations assistant on movie sites
etc.
Family and friends had no choice about being supportive about our choice. We made the decision
and went with it. They complained they weren’t going to see us but I reminded them they live in
the same town now and we hardly see them.
We have 5 children between us living in Whangarei, Auckland, and Melbourne. Grandkids in
Whangarei, Napier, Auckland and Melbourne and great grandkids in Napier and Whangarei,
another due in December, but for travelling there is just the two of us.
When we first started there were a few tweaks on the running gear to see to, otherwise it was
exciting. Just fell into the life style. (My dad had sold his belongings in 1960′, had a 1927 Buick
wife and 5 kids, a tent and a caravan and freedom camped from wellington up the east coast to
Tauranga and back to Palliser Bay for 8 years delivering his youngest son in the camp in the sand
dunes in Opotiki along the way. So, I had already had the old-style experience). Motor homing
today is a breeze.

Some of the not so good things are finding places to do maintenance. Trying not to hold other
traffic up and hearing about hostile areas. Not that we have come across any in 16 plus years on
the road but on the good side is everything else. Different views from the windows when we
117

Roaming home

choose. No mortgage no lawns to mow. Meeting some new long-time friends. Everything.
Although hard to work to live until we retired but now managing on the pension. Paying running
costs, insurances, living costs and phone and net.
If we had to pay trades people for maintenance, I don’t think we could do it. We chose this life
because Fred ended up in hospital with stress from work and decided as we both worked to live,
if one of us got Ill and needed to care for the other, we couldn’t afford to keep the house. If we
had to do this all over again? HELL YEAH.!!!!!! No regrets. Can’t have family stay but can get
around the country to see them all. Things we left behind were Family and Fred’s big man cave
double garage with everything from feeler gauges to generators.

Anita Thompson
We bought an Isuzu Elf 1991 campervan. When we bought it, we thought we would just be using
it for short holidays, the idea to live in it hadn't come about then. As I would be driving it a lot of
the time, I didn't want anything too big and tricky to find parks for. This meant that lack of space
was our biggest issue particularly when Matt, (my partner), was with us. Also coping with a small
fridge and only two elements to cook on were challenging. When we have needed parts, it has
been really tricky, we needed an oil cooler and had to get one bought over from Japan which was
costly.
Most people were supportive of the idea but family thought we should settle down after a year
on the road. Some friends were envious and wanted to do the same thing. Our two children,
Mahalia 6.5 and Nikau 4, have loved the experience but also enjoy being back in a house. I think
that it has given them a deeper bond as they have had so many experiences together and been
each other’s main playmate. They get along extremely well although still have their fights at the
end of the day when they are tired.
So, my partner Matt and two kids Mahalia 6.5 and Nikau 4, stay in the bus. Although the kids and
I would often go off by ourselves for months at a time when Matt had to stay back and work. This
gave us all a break as it was challenging with all of us in a small space. We also had a big dog
travelling with us which made more challenges with space and also where we could stay.
Unfortunately, we needed to get her put down at age 16 in Motueka which was very sad but we
were glad she got to spend her last year travelling with us.
118

Roaming home

We did unschooling with Mahalia (5 years) although put them both in a Steiner kindergarten in
Motueka when we wintered over there which was awesome. I also went to playcenter with Nikau
more to meet other mums and to be connected than for him, although he loved it. It was
probably the hardest thing for the kids not being around their friends and cousins, they used to
watch new campervans coming in to see if there were kids or not and mostly, they didn't.
We were only on the road for a year and a half and we adjusted very quickly from going to a
house. As the kids were small (3 and 5) they were always in my space anyway when we lived in a
three-bedroom home so I was used to it. We also spent most of our days outside exploring.
Lack of space can be challenging especially when it has been raining for days in a row and the lack
of community when you are on the move were things that we found the hardest. A few times I
was parked on the side of the road in tears when things went wrong. Most people have been
friendly but it’s hard when you are a family as most travelers are older NZMCA members or
tourists, unfortunately we didn't see many other families on our travels which we would have
loved.
The best thing about this life is FREEDOM - the freedom to go where you want and time to spend
with your kids exploring our beautiful country. The kids learnt so much, they learnt about coal
mines by actually walking through Denniston and Brunner’s coal mines and going to the coal
mining museum in Westport.

119

Roaming home

After running a lifestyle block, working and having small kids I was feeling pretty stressed, then to
sell the house we needed to get as much money as we could so had to renovate which was major.
By the time we had a contract on the house I was so over it I was ready to go and it was a relief to
have such a small space to clean and not numerous demands on my time.
We invested the money from the sale of our house and lived off the interest. We also received
Family Tax Credits and Matt also worked a lot when we were stationary, for example when we
wintered over in Motueka he got a job at Place makers and when we came back up from
travelling down to the bottom of the South Island, he worked at the orchards in Motueka.
Why we did it. After a lifetime of lots of responsibility I had a massive desire for freedom and
exploring. We started going away for longer and longer periods and it seemed natural to want to
go on the road. The kids were at good ages and it would give them lots of different experiences
so off we went. We sold our house and did a big clear out and put our stuff in a container at my
brothers. It was one of the best decisions I have made in my life.
We are back in a house now as we needed to reinvest our house money and stay in the property
market. Also, the kids and I wanted to experience community for a while. I feel very torn as a half
of me loves the beautiful property we have and the community we are in with our friends and
family and the other half just wants to go back on the road again. We would also love to get
another dog again and maybe some other animals but it’s hard to do that when you travel. I am
thinking of looking for another family to park up here as we have plenty of room and if we shared
animals and gardens, it would free us up. I really miss being on the road and am looking for ways
to get back out there although if we were going to live in it, I think we would really need to upsize as the kids are getting bigger and a decent fridge and oven would make life so much easier
for me!
We left family and friends, sold the house and lifestyle block. Matt also gave up his job but as it
turned out he got it back when we returned.

120

Roaming home

121

Roaming home

Leonie Bruker
Did you build or buy?
Converted a bus ourselves, it is a YMT 1976 Bedford
It was a 65-seater and five weeks later we were living in it heading to the South Island. We have
been on the road full time twenty-two years.

were your friends and family supportive of the idea?
Some were, some weren’t, we never took much notice. We are on our own journey

Do you have children?
Travelled with our son who was 17 at the time well he travelled with us he went off and did his
own thing when he was twenty.

How many people live with you?
Just me and my husband we were self-employed so have mostly worked together so not too
hard.

What were the first couple of years like?
The first few years it was hard as we had to learn to live frugally, we do it well now.
what are some of the worst things about living on the road?
The wet in winter.
what are some of the best things about living on the road?
The freedom.

Money.
My husband is a glass blower and we travelled with the original Gypsy fair for twenty-two years
which gave us a weekly income for eight months of the year and a travelling community. We have
now retired and are still travelling, we intend to spend a year in the South Island, cycling a lot of
122

Roaming home

the trails.

What was it that made you decide to live on the road?
We had travelled around Australia in the late eighties with three children, we came back to New
Zealand so they could go to high school. We sat still for eight years, we never got over the itchy
feet thing, our son got into a bit of trouble so we ended up at family counselling, where it was
explained to us, we were square pegs trying to fit into round holes. We needed to get back and
the road where we were happy.

If you had to do it again.
We asked ourselves the same question when earlier this year our daughter was preparing to
travel in a house truck, and the answer was a definite yes

What did you leave behind?
Four boxes which we have revisited and it is now two smaller ones.

123

Roaming home

Garry & Pam McQuoid

Did you build or buy?
We bought Buster as Woody then proceeded to rebuild for permanent living...he is a 1960 AEC
still with his original running gear... he came out if service in 1985 and has been a house bus
since,....we are his 5th owner and have had the privilege of having him for 3 years now.

were your friends and family supportive of the idea?
Some were, some were not... but that's the whole point. It’s our life. We own it and we are living
it...

Children?
124

Roaming home

Adult children who, when we were chained to the "normal" life routine and had smaller buses,
did travel with us and loved it...

How many people live with you?
There are two of us... Our friends have us six months of the year.

In fact, the bickering has all but stopped because we are not time hungry, stressed out, fatigued,
obligated, concentrated, castrated, outdated, under rated or plain emancipated...
We are living.

What were the first couple of years like?
Challenging...but the challenges are ours and ours alone.... selfish maybe but also refreshing.
I personally did many simple things I had never done before...I had the opportunity to do things I
had never done before ... who knew a day at the stick sales in Feilding could be so fascinating...

what are some of the worst things about living on the road?
Traffic....

what are some of the best things about living on the road?
When I think of going back to a nice little house again, I panic... My view would not change. I
wouldn't meet all these interesting people. Good and not so good. Would not be surprised about
what's around the corner...I think I would go back to composting....

Money.
We slugged our guts out for years and paid our mortgage off like good kiwis and we rent the
house out... After rates and insurance there's a little left... I sell paintings and crafts. We
occasionally find work...
Otherwise, it’s shoestring living...

What was it that made you decide to live on the road?

125

Roaming home

Buster is our 4th bus so we knew what we were getting ourselves in to... My first experience
living in a bus was 40 years ago... something the drivers’ parents did for 10 years and loved until
age made it difficult...the kids are grown and settled. what have we got to lose...?

If you had to do it again.
I would not change a thing

What did you leave behind?
We still have our property with a shed full of our stuff... Rehousing our animals was hard and
saying goodbye to good friends... Thank goodness for social media...

126

Roaming home

Philippa Page
I bought a 1974 Ford R1014 in November 2018. I had the diff blow in February 2019. Took 2
weeks to find the part then it had to be shipped to where I was. Cost $5000 to repair. Also found
out the wiring isn’t up to what I needed and solar isn’t enough. Daughter’s partner is going to do
the electrical for me as a qualified electrician.
Were your friends and family supportive of the idea?
It was a splitting decision. Some friends were really happy but mostly family were very negative
about it. I suffer PTSD and the friends who knew why I chose to buy the bus understand the
reasons. A lot of my family are unaware of what has happened to me and why I made the
decision. (I’m from Christchurch and went through the earthquakes)
Children?
I waited until my daughter was settled before I sold my house and bought the bus.
How many people live with you?
I’m by myself.
What were the first couple of years like?
I’m still in my first year and it’s had really good times and a big struggle. Part of the struggle was
just after getting the bus I had a fall and damaged my left leg. I still have pain in it and lost any
confidence in driving the bus. Came up north with friends who lived in their bus and they were
going to teach me to drive and go on weekend trips to get my confidence and see north island.
Unfortunately, things happened and plans were changed and I’m about to go home with
someone driving my bus for me and I’m going to spend time learning to drive her and be fully off
the grid over the summer.
What are some of the worst things about living on the road?
Finding safe places to park will be the biggest. I’ve been lucky and spent the last 7 months in
friends’ backyard. I haven’t done enough yet but have been warned the white slugs don’t like the
heavyweights. I have my NZMCA number on a board as I’ve been told some of the smaller vans
will report you for no reason than to get you in trouble.

127

Roaming home

what are some of the best things about living on the road?
I love having my own space and for me that it doesn’t change unless I change it. I have met some
nice people. I’m looking forward to making more fun experiences when I learn to drive my
monster.
Money.
I’m on income insurance and it’s a struggle. I’m also about to sort the rest of my stuff in storage
and sell to get some funds and reduce expenses.
What was it that made you decide to live on the road?
I separated 19 years ago and was left with a big debt. I had foreign students to help with debt
payments etc. Christchurch had the big earthquakes and a combination of the stress of house
work, child and debt was huge. I lost my job not long after. So, when both my parents died, I
decided I wanted to travel and knew I had no money and I struggle with unfamiliar environments.
I started planning getting a motorhome. I had to wait until I knew my daughter had somewhere
to live and a job and then try to sell my home. It all came together in November 2018.
If you had to do it again.
Only regret is I didn’t know enough about what I was buying. I may have made different
decisions. I’m happy in my bus. Just wish I had learnt to drive bigger vehicles earlier in life and
have more confidence driving her.
What did you leave behind?
My daughter but I’m heading back. Some family Items that I can’t fit in bus and have stored. And
a Vegetable Garden.

128

Roaming home

Annie and Richard Bland
Did you build or buy?
Bought and re-furbished the inside
were your friends and family supportive of the idea?
Not really… Some yes, most no.
Children?
No, but there has been in the past.
How many people live with you?
2 of us.
What were the first couple of years like?
Heaven on wheels.
what are some of the worst things about living on the road?
Some places who aren’t Motorhome friendly, hyper-restrictive Council Freedom camping bylaws
and heavy fines if broken.
what are some of the best things about living on the road?
How much time have you got?
The ability to just go to where you want to be or be where you didn’t plan on going, but you love
it anyway.
Money.
Hubby Retired… Myself, working under the umbrella of the Creative Travelers Fair selling my
wares. along with many other stall holders.
What was it that made you decide to live on the road?
No specific reason… We were able to make a living on the road… so we went.
129

Roaming home

If you had to do it again.
I did do it again when after 9 years I stopped travelling to raise my grandkids and when they were
gone, we started travelling again.
What did you leave behind?
Our family and Grandchildren… but not much more

130

Roaming home

Duncan Rogers
Did you build or buy?
Bought on trade me!

were your friends and family supportive of the idea?
Yes

Children?
no

How many people live with you?
None.

What were the first couple of years like?
Steep learning curve but great.

what are some of the worst things about living on the road?
Maintenance.

what are some of the best things about living on the road?
Free do on to choose.

Money.
Bit of a problem. Savings and a small pension.

What was it that made you decide to live on the road?
I was working in the middle East for many years. My wife died in 2013 and I decided to retire to
NZ. Bought an old bus on trade me and the rest is as they say is history.

If you had to do it again?
131

Roaming home

Yes, I would. In hindsight a bit of land as a base would have been a good idea. Just somewhere
you could run to if you needed to park up for maintenance or because of the weather or health
issues.

What did you leave behind?
Good paying job in Dubai. Great lifestyle, maid, gardener, big company car and lots of warm
sunshine.

132

Roaming home

serenadawsonart.com

133

fivetogether.nz

Roaming home

In memory of Richard Bland, who sadly passed not long after this book was written. It was a privilege to
meet such a generous man.

134

Roaming home

Artist Annie Bland
Technical bit: Building a house truck is simpler than outfitting a bus and quicker than
a house. A truck layout is like a sleepout, or small shed except the walls are thinner and
you use steel for the main structure instead of wood. We could have used wood, but we
were told that transport NZ was getting tougher on wooden-built vehicles, which
turned out not to be the case. However, if you were to go that way, I wouldn’t use
anything less that 75x50mm framing, and steel strap bracing to keep it rigid.
Also, some sort of steel box section rollover bar at the highest point would be a good
idea and will allow a rollover without crushing anyone traveling inside, as long as it’s
sufficient to take the weight of the vehicle upside down. It used to be a requirement
once upon a time but not any longer, but better safe than sorry. After we welded the
steel frames to the deck, we screwed timber onto the frames so when it came time to
put the cladding on, we could screw into the timber rather than the steel, as we didn’t
want moisture traveling from the screw heads into the steel and rusting it out.
Finding plans for constructing a house truck was difficult and I only had pictures on the
internet to go by, but since I had some building experience and knew how to weld, I
didn’t think it would be too difficult. When building a house truck, it sometimes helps
to think about the end of a build and work backwards. Think about where you want to
put your solar panels, your batteries, locker storage, shower, sink and any hose or
wastewater outlets, beds etc. We drew pretty much the whole thing on the deck in chalk
and then used tape to mark out where everything will go. We chalked, erased, and
chalked again many times. Ours had a steel deck, so for plumbing we had to cut a hole
in the steel deck first. Not fun, and in hindsight it would have been better to get rid of
the existing deck and build a new one from scratch as it was also very heavy, but it did
mean I could weld the uprights straight onto the deck. When you plan outlets or inlets
make sure they are not going to be above wheel arches, diesel tank, spare wheel, or
anything else that might interfere with it.
For lining the inside wall, we used 10mm ply, so then when it comes to hanging
cupboards or attaching anything to the wall you don’t have to find framing to screw to.
You can screw stuff to the wall anywhere. On the outside we used ply as well as it was
135

Roaming home

cheaper than using aluminum. Depending on how you space your frames, if you use too
thin a ply on the outside walls it can buckle with temperature variations so I would use a
minimum of 7 mm with maximum framing distance of 600mm but 9mm ply would be
better and in between battening
If you are going to build a folding deck at the back or side remember that when it’s up,
you won’t be able to get inside if it closes over the door. It can be a bit annoying having
to drop the deck all the time to get in. We put in a side door to enable access when the
deck was up. Of course, a fixed deck makes this a lot simpler if you can accommodate
it, depending on the size of your vehicle and how much overhang you can have. For
more room you can overhang your floor past the chassis at the rear but if you extend
the chassis and not the deck then you will need to get it certified. How much you can
overhang depends upon your wheelbase. You can only have 70% of the distance
between axels to overhang the back. You can overhang the Luton 3 meters from the
front of the seat when the seats in its most pushed back position but keep in mind the
weight up there as you might need to have a support pole or two.
Note: Fire extinguishers are cheap so always make sure you have one handy in your
truck and have one in the cab as well just to be on the safe side.

Why not a bus?
These can be purchased cheaply as ex school buses for around $8,000 or fully fitted out
for anything between 20,000 and 200,000. I have seen them with pop outs too. But for
me, I always envisioned owning some land one day, so I made the box of the truck in
such a way to be able to be lifted off and placed on piles like a tiny home and then
could resell the truck. Not so for a bus. Busses also have lots of windows, and this can
make them cold in winter or too hot in summer. But like anything you can find ways of
minimizing these issues. But for us we had more familiarity and experience working
with trucks and timber than buses.
The size of your build or purchase only needs to be what’s comfortable for the number
of people living in it. In summer we spent most of the time outside but winter or when
it’s raining, it needs to not feel too claustrophobic. Septic Waste systems need to be
136

Roaming home

thought out well, whether you have underneath storage tanks, or cassette type facilities.
When we started out, I experimented with a home-made composting toilet which I built
using a plastic bin from the hardware shop, and then glued in fittings so we could dump
it at the dump station with those bayonet fittings that they have, and that nobody uses
because most of us don’t have that kind of connection anyway.
I had no idea what to do with dry material waste that couldn’t be flushed down the
dump station hole, so we just had to dump it the same as wet waste. I didn’t know it at
the time, but I found out that other people used to just bag it up and put into the
rubbish bins. I wasn’t too keen on that idea in case it came open and some poor trash
collector or dumpster diver ended up with a surprise he didn’t want.
With four of us using the toilet, ours had to be emptied quite regularly so it never would
have had time to compost anyway, and it just ended up going into the normal dumpstation drain. Of course, being mostly dry, I had to add water to it and use a paint stirrer
on a cordless drill to mix it up enough to flow out the waste pipe.
But one day I twisted the bayonet fitting onto it after adding water to the dry mix to
connect the waste pipe and the whole fitting came apart and liquid poop went
everywhere, both inside and outside the truck. Apparently, some glues do not stick to
some plastics. Who knew right?
After that I got a big Cassette toilet and never looked back. For a water tank and a grey
water tank we used two plastic drums about 100 liters each and hung them underneath
using two 850kg strops per tank and this worked fine but I would recommend
strapping them up with steel welded straps for better security, as once we managed to
knock one loose when we pulled out of a gas station and had people pointing, as I
dragged my tank along the road. At the end of the day what’s important is that you
build it so it works for you, as each vehicle is pretty individualistic unless you are talking
about those white camper things which kind of all look the same.
A gas storage locker is a great time saver as it’s outside the truck. The last thing you
want is a gas leak when everyone is asleep. If you have a gas fridge, then it will usually
have an exposed pilot light going all the time and it would be quite happy, igniting all
that gas. If you must carry it on board then at least get a gas leak detector.
137

Roaming home

2 WHAT’S IT GOING TO COST?
Well, the one obvious cost if you have a heavy vehicle will be fuel and RUC’S. This is
the largest part of the expense of traveling. As of writing this, with the 20 percent tariff
due to be placed on fuel and road users’ tax, this can be expensive. For us to go 1000
kilometers in our truck will cost us close to $1200.00. That’s just to do the traveling
part. Our first truck wasn’t too bad and generally cost the same as a large car to fill. But
bigger trucks and busses have a lot bigger tanks to fill than your average car and they
are designed to carry heavy loads which requires a big engine. Then you have insurance
if you choose to get it.
Tires. For us these are roughly $450 per tire. We have 6 tires on our truck. Registration
is currently $80.00 FOR 6 months
Certificate of Fitness. Budget on at least $500 if nothing serious is found. It always pays
to do a VCA through a trucking company first as these can tell you of potential
problems before you do the official COF. If you get taken off the road with chassis
heave, where there develops significant separation between the two parts of a chassis,
then you will have to get it remedied and certified as well as rechecked by an engineer
every year or two depending on the person who certified it. This can cost a minimum of
$1000,00 a time. Testing station inspectors have a tremendous amount of liberty when
it comes to following the rules. A lot of their decisions can be open to interpretation
and guesses so two different people will get two different results by how they interpret
it. A VCA ensures that what they put down on the sheet is what they are inspecting and
that’s usually all they will reinspect when it comes back fixed.
Then there is the maintenance aspect of, especially older vehicles. Let’s face it.
Everything breaks down over time or rusts and there will always be upkeep and
prevention expenses in this. When we first brought our Hino truck, we had to get a new
clutch and new brakes. So, strait away we had a bill of roughly $16000,00. Everything in
a truck will cost more than a car or caravan. I mean these are commercial vehicles after
all and are built to take a beating. But it’s not unusual to be able to do a million miles in
a truck compared to what a car will do because everything is heavy and built for a
commercial purpose. Brakes on a truck do not like sitting without movement or they
will get moisture build up and rust buildup. Their made to be used and used hard. Now
138

Roaming home

when you travel this is fine for doing only 100 kilometer’s a month and things will last a
long time as long as they are used a bit. Just starting the truck every couple of weeks
and pumping the breaks and using the clutch will greatly help in keeping things working
and rust free. But one of the worsts things for a truck is to be parked up without
moving for months at a time and especially on long grass where moisture can travel up
onto the truck chassis. It’s much better to be parked on hard dry earth, tar seal or
gravel. Occasionally if you have a multitool with skinny blades, you can work the blade
in between the chassis rails to keep rust scale from building up between them and then
covering with some thick chassis sealer.
So, can you save money and make this affordable? The answer is yes you sure can. If
you don’t have to pay rent then you can potentially save $15,000 a year if you were
paying rent of $300 a week. If you have something to rent out to someone, be it a
house, caravan for example then you are in an even better situation and won’t have to
rely so heavily on looking for work or otherwise generating income.
Get rid of as much debt as you possibly can or as fast as you can to bring your
outgoings down and don’t get into the tourist trap where you will generally pay
premium prices that tourists pay for everything. Many things in New Zealand are free
or cheap if you know where to go. Getting involved in a traveling group on Facebook
can help to discover some of the lesser-known places that only those in the know are
aware of. We were not in the best financial position when we started traveling because
we had massive debt but we did have a place to rent out which paid for the debt s and
then we had child support which usually paid for our food. But the traveling we had to
do with whatever income we could find. Then there is the emotional cost. This life can
be a stressful one, at least in the beginning and some relationships do not stand the
pressures that they can come under during hardships. But that could be said for most
situations and not just traveling for long periods together. Then there are the luxuries
you miss, things that made life convenient and easy. To me though this is a worthwhile
sacrifice compared to the growth that can come from the experience shared together.
There are times when you might wonder what you saw in the other person or find that
you discover some of your bad points and theirs rather annoying. My advice here is to
keep on moving and make the trip as varied and enjoyable as possible because there is
nothing worse than just sitting in one spot doing nothing, especially in a smallish vehicle
139

Roaming home

and especially with kids.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
I left school at the age of 14 due to spending much of my time in hospital. Suffice it to
say, I taught myself to write just as I have taught myself many things that relate to life
and getting myself into and out of trouble. To me this is how life is supposed to be.
You have one shot at this life and the most common thing people say, when they can
no longer have much of a life is what they wish they had done. People often say, I don’t
want to think about having kids or getting married until I have job security or some
other far away thing that may or may not come and we spend far too much time living
in the future instead of the present. What happens if you get married, have kids and
then lose your job? You’re better off living whilst living is there to be had and let your
need take you to the solution. This is primarily how we have lived this journey. If we
waited until we, had it all together, we would never have made it out of the gate. No
one is coming to rescue you, make your dreams come true, tell you to get off the couch,
turn off the tv and do something with your life. That’s all on you. Don’t leave it too
long.

Now for the part some will accept and some will not. Regarding spirituality I note in
this book that I had Christian leanings. Some have other spiritual beliefs and values, and
I make no judgment on whether their spiritual beliefs have merit or not. This isn’t my
place to judge. I put this here as an explanation of what I believe, and you are free to
accept or reject it. It’s what is in the bible and what I came to believe. But if you ever
wondered about Christianity this may be of some use as a basic summary.
Of all the religions of the world, most acknowledge Jesus as a key figure in history. But
in the bible Jesus claims to be the Son of God and the only way to God and eternal life.
All other religions tend to have at the core of them, access to an afterlife by way of selfeffort or following strict rules, to reach a kind of perfected state whereby they have
earned their place in heaven and the rewards associated with it. As far as I’m aware,
Christianity, [not the religious, legalistic or ritualistic kind, but the faith-based kind], is
the only way to heaven based upon a person putting their faith and trust in Jesus to save
140

Roaming home

them, and this is wholly as a result of Christ’s kindness and love.
The Gospel
Who can be saved?
Jesus said “with man this is impossible, but with God all things are possible”. Why is
that? For a start He said that no one can come to the Son except that God draw him
God says that "he is not willing that any should perish" and yet many go in the gate that
leads to destruction and few people go through the gate to eternal life. He also states
that there is a time when a person hears His voice and it pulls at his heart for, He says if
you hear his voice "do not harden your heart". Our hearts are already hard because of
sin but it can get hardened to the point that it no longer hears anything.
But even if we do respond to the drawing of the father by way of His love, tenderness
and kindness, and repent, we still will not enter into eternal life by our own effort. We
enter into His kingdom only by faith and his Grace. The work of becoming the people
we are meant to be and being made holy is also a work of God. We really have nothing
to offer him.
Man, through his own efforts can do nothing about the condition of his heart. He said
even our hearts are completely wicked. You might say, well not everyone is wicked
because some people do good things. You’re right, but Jesus said even a wicked person
has a knowledge of how to do good things, but many choose not to. How often does
our conscience tell us when we have done something wrong? Even though we might
love our fellow man, we don’t love the God who created us. He is Holy and we are not.
So, in order to get saved and live with the God of life and our creator for eternity we
only have to accept his invitation. That’s it. So, if you hear His gentle pulling at your
heart, convincing you that you are a sinner in need of forgiveness, then say yes. As soon
as you do you will know beyond a doubt that you have passed from death to life. He
invites us to taste it and see for ourselves that He is good.
The gospel means Good News and it is. So why the Cross? What’s that all about? In
order to stay holy and just God must act accordingly, and He cannot just ignore the
crimes we have committed against Him, each other, and His creation. The bible says
that even the earth cries out to be free of the sin that is corrupting it and he certainly
cannot allow a sinful person into heaven. He needed to satisfy his justice in order to be
free to give us his mercy. So, he did this by visiting his justice and judgement upon His
son. Jesus shed His blood on the cross so that we could escape His wrath. So, if you
accept His sacrifice to pay your debt then God calls your debt paid in full. Our old
141

Roaming home

nature is still alive and well in us but we daily live less and less from that nature as He
puts His nature in us and we choose to be led by His Spirit rather than our corrupt
nature.
His life for ours. Our sin in exchange for His goodness.
All those who call on the name of the Lord will be saved.
Shalom

142

